The Project Gutenberg EBook of Flowers of the Sky, by Richard A. Proctor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Flowers of the Sky

Author: Richard A. Proctor

Release Date: December 6, 2017 [EBook #56133]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWERS OF THE SKY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Christopher Wright and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









FLOWERS OF THE SKY




FLOWERS OF THE SKY

BY RICHARD A. PROCTOR

AUTHOR OF "THE EXPANSE OF HEAVEN," "THE INFINITIES AROUND US," "THE
UNIVERSE OF STARS," "THE SUN," "THE MOON," ETC., ETC.

_WITH FIFTY-FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS_

[Illustration]

  New York
  A. C. ARMSTRONG AND SON
  714, BROADWAY

  _All rights reserved_




      "Spirit of nature! here,
    In this interminable wilderness
    Of worlds, at whose immensity
      Even soaring fancy staggers,
      Here is thy fitting temple.
        Yet not the lightest leaf
      That quivers to the passing breeze
        Is less instinct with thee."--_Shelley._




CONTENTS.


                                            PAGE
     I. LIGHT                                  1

    II. SPACE                                 17

   III. THE INFINITELY MINUTE                 31

    IV. THE MYSTERY OF GRAVITY                43

     V. THE END OF MANY WORLDS                56

    VI. THE AURORA BOREALIS                   91

   VII. THE LUNAR HALO                       114

  VIII. MOONLIGHT                            125

    IX. THE PLANET MARS                      149

     X. THE PLANET JUPITER                   191

    XI. THE RINGED PLANET SATURN             215

   XII. FANCIED FIGURES AMONG THE STARS      236

  XIII. TRANSITS OF VENUS                    273




[Illustration]




I.

_LIGHT._

    "What soul was his, when, from the naked top
    Of some bold headland, he beheld the sun
    Rise up and bathe the world in light! He looked--
    Ocean and earth, the solid frame of earth
    And ocean's liquid mass, beneath him lay
    In gladness and deep joy."


We live in a mighty ocean whose waves are ever rushing hither and
thither, always according to law, with velocity inconceivable, almost
immeasurable. These waves lave the shore of that island of space which
is our home, travelling to it from remotest regions, and making known to
us all that we know of what lies outside our small abode. We call these
waves, or rather their effects, by the name of Light. We recognise in
light--

      "offspring of Heav'n's first-born
    And of th' Eternal co-eternal beam"--

the antecedent of all else that exists in the universe; or, as Sir John
Herschel said, "the superior in point of rank and conception to all
other products or results of creative power in the physical world. It is
light which alone can give, and does give us, the assurance of a uniform
and all-pervading energy--a mechanism almost beyond conception, complex,
minute, and powerful, by which that influence, or rather that movement,
is propagated. Our evidence of the existence of gravitation fails us
beyond the region of the double stars, or leaves at best only a
presumption amounting to moral conviction in its favour. But the
argument for a unity of design and action afforded by light stands
unweakened by distance, and is co-extensive with the universe itself."

What, then, is light? What is that mysterious movement of some essence
pervading all space, whereby, from remotest depths, news is brought to
us, after journeys lasting many years, though space is traversed at a
rate exceeding more than ten million times the velocity of the swiftest
express train?

Light is in reality the result of undulations in what is called the
ether of space, a perfectly transparent, almost perfectly elastic
medium, occupying not only void space, but flowing as freely through the
densest solids as the summer breeze flows through the forest trees. The
waves of light cannot in this way pass through solid or liquid, or even
aerial bodies, but either they are sooner or later brought to rest, or
else they are more or less gradually deflected; just as the waves which
traverse the ocean come to their end, or are deflected, when they meet
the shore or shallows near the shore.

All light, however, has its real origin, not in the ethereal ocean
itself, but in the movements of the minute particles of which all forms
of matter known to us are composed. A tiny atom, far too small to be
perceived with a microscope, even though one should be made ten thousand
times more powerful than any yet constructed, when set in rapid
vibration, raises minute waves in the ethereal ocean, just as a small
body, vibrating on the surface of a sheet of water, would generate waves
there. And as the water-waves would travel radially away from the place
of their birth, so do the light-waves generated by the vibrations of one
of the atoms composing a luminous body radiate forth in all directions
through the ethereal ocean until, encountering some obstacle, they are
sent (reduced in size) in a new direction.

In some luminous bodies there are atoms vibrating in many different
periods (all very small) so as to cause light-waves of many different
kinds to proceed from the body. In other cases the atoms all vibrate at
one rate, or at two or three or some definite number of rates, so that
only light-waves of certain kinds proceed from the body. But in all
cases these light-waves only cause us to see the body when they flow in
through the pupil of the eye, and falling upon the retina (or the
choroid membrane, or whatever part of the eye it may be which finally
receives the waves), convey to the optic nerve, and thence to the brain,
the information that such and such a body, so coloured, so shaped, so
moving, exists towards that direction from which the light-waves seem to
come. The body so _seen_, as we call it, may be the original source of
light, or may be a body on which light has been reflected to us.

It is in this way that we receive information from light-waves. It will
be conceived how minute they must be, how perfectly they must retain
their separate character, multitudinous though they are, in traversing
the ether (even when that ether is clogged by the gross matter of our
ordinary air), if we remember how through the tiny eye-pupil we often
receive light-waves telling us of all the details, all the varieties of
colour and brightness, all the movements in a rich landscape.

Even more startling are the thoughts suggested by a view of the starlit
heavens. From hundreds of suns at once the light-waves which have
traversed varying but all enormous distances pour in upon the small
circle of the eye-pupil, waves of many kinds coming in together from
each sun. The waves which thus reach the eye from one bright star have
been but a few years upon their journey; all that time they have been
traversing an ocean swept in every part by untold millions of other
waves, and yet they arrive as perfect in order and regularity as rollers
which have traversed a wide sea pour in upon a level shore. From another
star, as bright as the first, they have been years in travelling; from
some among the fainter stars, hundreds, perhaps thousands of years. Yet
still they flow on, each order of waves in perfect uniformity as when
they first left their parent sun.

But even this is not all. Among the waves which reach the eye many, nay,
most, are so small that ordinary vision cannot perceive their action.
Take, however, a telescope, and so gather them together as to intensify
this action, and they are rendered perceptible, just as the unnoticed
heaving of ocean becomes a manifest wave-motion when it reaches a
regularly narrowing inlet. Thus, from stars so remote that their light
has required thousands, or, even in some cases, perhaps, hundreds of
thousands of years in reaching us, the light-waves flow steadily in upon
us. So small are these waves, that the breadth of from forty to sixty
thousand of them would occupy but a single inch. Through every point in
space waves from all the hundred millions of stars are at all times
simultaneously rushing at the rate of one hundred and eighty-five
thousand miles in every second of time: yet they travel on altogether
undisturbed, and each tells its story as distinctly as though the ether
had conveyed no other message, and that message but for a short
distance.

It would be difficult to say which thought, considered in its real
significance, is more striking,--the thought of what is done for us by
light regarded as a terrestrial phenomenon, or the thought of what light
is doing, and has done, in presenting to us a view of the starlit
heavens.

When the sun rises in splendour above the eastern horizon, tinting the
sky with varied colours, lighting up the clouds which till then have
been but dark patches on the heavens, bringing out the colours of hill
and dale, rock and river, fields and woods, the heart gladdens at the
spectacle. A pleasing melancholy falls on us as the light fades away at
eventide, tint after tint vanishing, until at length the gloom of night
enshrouds all. The full splendour of mid-day, the chastened splendour of
a moonlit night, and the glory of the heavens when "all the stars shine,
and the shepherd gladdens in his heart," stir the soul in like manner;
and it might seem to many that to analyse these glories, to explain
their scientific meaning, would be to rob the mind of the pleasure it
had before found in such scenes. Many would be disposed to think that a
purer enjoyment is expressed by Augustine than any student of science
could find in the wonders of light, in those words in which he
expresses his sense of the loveliness of fair forms and brilliant
colours. "For light, queen of the colours," he says, "bathing all I can
look upon, from morning till evening, let me go where I will, will still
keep gliding by me in unnumbered guises, and soothe me whilst I am busy
at other things, and am thinking nothing of her." But the sensuous
pleasure afforded by light is enhanced, while a purer and higher
enjoyment is superadded, when the real meaning of the display is
understood. As the astronomer sees in the sun a more glorious object
than the sun of the poet, recognising in imagination not only the
visible splendour of that orb, but the mighty energy with which it is
swaying the motions of a scheme of circling worlds, the wondrous
activities at work throughout its entire frame, the inconceivable tumult
which must prevail in that seemingly silent globe, so the glories of
light, rightly understood, are far more impressive than as they appeal
simply to the senses.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Sunrise on the Righi.]

Consider, for instance, the real meaning of sunrise. The orb seemingly
rising above the horizon, but, in reality, at rest, is the source of all
the glory which is spreading over the fair face of earth. The atoms of
that remote body, vibrating with intensest activity, send forth in all
directions ethereal waves, and of these relatively but a very few, about
one in two thousand millions, fall upon our earth, producing the
phenomena of sunlight. They have been little more than eight minutes on
the road, but in that short time they have traversed more than
90,000,000 of miles. Were they to fall directly upon our earth, we
should see few of the splendours which attend the uprising of the sun.
The deep air clothing our earth receives the onward rushing waves, and
reflects them in all directions. To use Biot's simile, "The air is a
sort of brilliant veil, which multiplies and diversifies the sunlight by
an infinity of repercussions." Nor is the wonder of the scene, or its
effect in filling the mind with solemn and poetic thoughts,
diminished--on the contrary, it is enhanced--by the recollection that
the gradually growing glory of day is brought about by the slow turning
of the mighty earth,--

                  "that spinning sleeps
    On her soft axle, as she paces even,
    And bears us soft with the smooth air along."

But if this is true of a scene of terrestrial splendour, how much more
fully may it be said of the glories of the heavens? No poet, if unaware
of the real meaning of modern discoveries respecting the celestial
bodies, can be moved by the starlit depths as the astronomer is, at
least the astronomer whose study of science is not limited to mere
observation and calculation. Hundreds of bright points of light
sparkling, and sometimes varying strangely in colour, form, no doubt, a
beautiful scene; but the scene is not less beautiful, and certainly it
is far more impressive, when we remember that every one of these points
of light is a sun, mighty in attractive energy like ours, its whole
surface glowing with fiery heat, and every particle of its substance
constantly in motion, if not always in the fierce rush of cosmic
hurricanes, yet with the ceaseless vibrations which generate the
ethereal light-waves telling us of the star's existence.

There is one strange thought connected with the motion of light-waves
through the ether of space which has not, I think, received the
attention it deserves.

Every one knows that when we look at the heavens we do not see the
celestial bodies where they are, but where they _were_, and again, not
where they were at any one moment of time, but some where they were a
short time ago, others where they were very long ago. But it is not so
generally known, or remembered by those who do know it, that if light
were not so active as it is the result would be that utterly incorrect
pictures of the celestial depths would continually be presented to us.
As matters actually are no orb in space can appear very far from its
true place. We see the sun, for instance, at any moment, not where he
is, but where he was (or rather towards the direction in which he lay)
about eight minutes before. But as the real velocity of the earth, and
therefore the apparent velocity of the sun, amounts only to about
eighteen miles per second, the sun is only thrown about 9000 miles out
of his true position, which is but about the ninetieth part of his
diameter: so that we see the sun very nearly in his right place. Now it
might seem that a star whose light takes, say, twenty years in reaching
us, must be seen very far from its true place, supposing the star to be
travelling along very quickly; and, in one sense, this is true. If such
a star is moving at the rate of fifty miles per second, athwart the line
of sight, it will be out of place by so considerable a distance as
315,000,000,000 of miles. Yet the star will appear very nearly in its
true position, simply because, at the star's enormous distance from us,
even the great distance just named is reduced to a very small apparent
amount. Such a star would, in fact, be displaced by only about the
thirtieth part of the sun's or moon's apparent diameters, or by about a
fifteenth part of the distance separating the middle star of the Great
Bear's tail from its small companion, sometimes called Jack by the
Middle Horse. Thus the stellar heavens present very truly to us the
positions of the stars; for such athwart motion as I have just imagined
would be very much larger than the motion of far the greater number of
the stars. But we only thus see the heavens truly pictured because of
the enormous velocity with which light travels. If light swept along
only at the rate of a hundred miles in a second (a velocity still far
beyond our powers of conception), there would be no believing what we
should see, for every star, and our own sun, and all the planets, and
even our own companion planet, the moon, would be thrown in appearance
very far from their true positions. If they were all shifted in position
by the same amount and in the same direction the picture would still be
true, in a sense, just as we see a true picture of an object at the
bottom of a clear lake, though the picture is displaced by the
refractive action of the water on the rays of light. But, in the
imagined case, the sun, and moon, and planets, and stars would be
shifted by different amounts and in different ways, simply because they
are moving at different rates and in different directions. The scene
presented to us would have been utterly untrue. Astronomy as a science
could probably have had no existence in such a case. Assuredly it could
have had no existence until students of the heavenly bodies had learned
to accept as the first axiom of their science the doctrine that "Seeing
is not believing."

[Illustration: Fig 2.--Sunset at Sea.]

A strange thought truly, that so active are the orbs peopling space, so
swiftly do they rush onwards upon their orbits, that light, carrying its
message at a rate exceeding six thousand times the velocity of the
swiftest express train, would be utterly unable to give a true account
of the position and movements of the celestial bodies. Fortunately light
gives a true record, because the qualities of the cosmic ether are such
that the message of light is transmitted hundreds of times more swiftly
than the swiftest bodies in the universe travel onwards upon their
orbits around each other or in space.




[Illustration]




II.

_SPACE_


Although astronomy tells us in clearest words of the vast depths of
space which surround our earth on all sides, we are not thereby enabled
to realize their enormous extension. It is not merely that the unknown
depths beyond the range of our most powerful telescopes are
inconceivable, but that the parts of space which we can examine are on
too large a scale for us to conceive their real dimensions. It is hardly
going too far to say that our powers of actual conception are limited to
the extent of space over which the eye _seems_ to range in the daytime.
Of course in the daytime, at least in clear weather, there is one
direction in which the eyesight ranges over a distance of many millions
of miles,--namely, where we see the sun. But the sense of sight is not
cognisant of that enormous distance, and simply presents the sun to us
as a bright disc in the sky, or perhaps rather nearer to us than the
sky. Even the distance of the sky itself is under-estimated. A portion
of the light we receive from the sky on a clear day comes from parts of
the atmosphere distant more than thirty or forty miles from us; but the
eye does not recognise the fact. The blue sky seems a little farther off
than the clouds, but not much; the light clouds of summer seem a little
but not much farther off than the heavier clouds of a winter sky; a
cloud-covered winter sky seems a little farther off than heavy
rain-clouds. The actual varieties of distance among clouds of various
kinds are not much more clearly discerned than the actual varieties of
distance among the heavenly bodies. The estimate formed of the distance
of a cloud-covered sky overhead probably amounts to little more than a
mile, and it is very doubtful whether the mind presents the remotest
depths of a blue sky overhead at more than two miles. Towards the
horizon the distance seems greater, and probably on a cloudy day the sky
near the horizon is unconsciously regarded as at a distance of about
five miles, while blue sky near the horizon may be regarded as lying at
a distance of six or seven miles, the arch of a blue sky seeming to be
far more deeply curved than that of a cloud-covered sky.

It is to distances such as these that the mind unconsciously refers the
celestial bodies. We know that the moon is about 2,000 miles in
diameter, but the mind refuses to present her to us as other than a
round disc much smaller than those other objects in sight which occupy a
much larger portion of the field of vision. The sun cannot be conceived
to exceed the moon enormously in size, seeing that he appears no larger;
and all the multitude of stars are judged by the sight to be mere bright
points of light in reality as they appear to be.

How, then, can we hope to appreciate the vastness of space whereof
astronomy tells us? To the student of science attempting to conceive the
immensities of whose existence he is assured, the same lesson might be
taught in parable which the child of St. Augustine's vision taught the
Numidian theologian. As reasonably might an infant hope to pour the
waters of ocean into a hollow, scooped with his tiny fingers in the
sand, as man to picture in his narrow mind the length and breadth and
depth of the abysses of space in which our earth is lost.

Yet, as a picture of a great mansion may be so drawn on a small scrap of
paper as to convey just ideas of its proportions, so may the great
truths which astronomy has taught us about the depths of space be so
presented that just conceptions may be formed of the proportions of at
least those parts of the universe which lie within the range of
scientific vision, though it would be hopeless to attempt to conceive
their real dimensions.

Thus, when we learn that a globe as large as our earth, suspended beside
the moon, would seem to have a diameter exceeding hers nearly four
times, so that the globe would cover a space in the heavens about
thirteen times as large as the moon covers, we form a just conception of
the size of the moon as compared with the earth, though the mind cannot
conceive such a body as the moon or the earth really is. When, in turn,
we are told that if a globe as large as the earth, but glowing as
brightly as the sun, were set beside the sun, it would look a mere point
of light, we not only learn to picture rightly to ourselves how largely
the sun exceeds the earth, but also how enormous must be the real
distance of the sun.

Another step leads us to a standpoint whence we can form a correct
estimate of the vast distance of the fixed stars; for we learn that so
enormous is the distance of even the nearest fixed star, that the
tremendous space separating the earth from that star sinks in turn into
the merest point, insomuch that if a globe as bright as the sun had the
earth's orbit as a close fitting girdle, then this glorious orb (with a
diameter of some 184,000,000 of miles) would look very much smaller than
such a globe as our earth would look at the sun's distance--would, in
fact, occupy but about one-fortieth part of the space in the sky which
she, though she would then look a mere point, would occupy if viewed
from that distance.

But there is a way of viewing the immensities of space which, though not
aiding us indeed to conceive them, enables the mind to picture their
proportions better than any other. The dimensions of the earth's path
around the sun sink into insignificance beside those of the outermost
planets; but these in their turn dwindle into nothingness beside those
of some among the comets. From the paths of these comets, if only
sentient and reasoning beings could trace out in a comet's company those
mighty orbits, and could have for the duration of their existence not
the brief span of time which measures the longest human life, but many
circuits of their comet home around the same ruling orb (as we live
during many circuits of our globe around the sun), the dimensions of the
star-depths, which even to scientific insight are all but immeasurable,
would be directly discernible. Not only would the proportions of that
mighty system be perceived, whose fruits and blossoms are suns and
worlds, but even the gradually changing arrangement of its parts could
be discerned.

Some comets, indeed, as I pointed out in an essay on comets several
months ago (see Expanse of Heaven, p. 149), do not travel around the
sun, but flit from sun to sun on journeys lasting millions of years,
paying each sun but a single visit. A being inhabiting such a comet,
and having these interstellar journeys as the years of his existence, so
that he could live through many of them, would have a wonderful insight
into the economy of the stellar system. If his powers of conception as
far exceeded ours as the range of his travels and the duration of his
existence, he would be able to recognise the proportions of a large part
of the stellar universe as clearly as we recognise the proportions of
the solar system.

But leaving these wonderful wanderers, whose journeys are as far beyond
our powers of conception as the immensity of the regions of star-strewn
space, we may find, among the comets belonging to the sun's domain,
bodies whose range of travel would give their inhabitants far clearer
views of the architecture of the heavens than even the profoundest
terrestrial astronomer can possibly obtain.

Such a comet as Halley's (fig. 3) for instance, though one of
comparatively limited range in space, yet travels so far from the sun
that, from the extreme part of its path, it sees the stars displaced
nearly twenty times as much (owing to its own change of position) as
they are from the earth on opposite sides of her comparatively narrow
orbit. And the length of this comet's year, if it indicated the length
of the lives of all creatures travelling along with it, would suggest a
power of patiently watching the progress of changes lasting not a few of
our years only, but for centuries. Seventy-five or seventy-six years
elapse between each return of this comet to the sun's neighbourhood, and
one who should have lived during sixty or seventy circuits of this body
around its mighty orbit would have been able to watch the rush of stars,
with their velocities of many miles per second, until visible
displacements had taken place in their positions.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Halley's Comet of 1835.]

This, however, is as nothing compared with the mighty range in space and
the enormous period of the orbit of the great comet of the year 1811
(fig. 4). This comet is, on the whole, the most remarkable ever known.
It was visible for nearly seventeen months, and though it did not
approach the sun within 100,000,000 miles, and was therefore not subject
to that violence of action which has caused enormous tails to be thrown
out from comets which have come within a few million miles of him, or
even within less than a quarter of his own diameter, it flourished forth
a tail 120,000,000 of miles in length. Its orbit has, according to the
calculations of the astronomer Argelander, a space exceeding the earth's
distance from the sun 211 times, and thus surpassing even the mighty
distance of Neptune fully seven times. It occupies in circuiting this
mighty path no less than 3065 of our years (with a possible error either
way of about forty-three years). So that, according to Bible chronology,
this comet's last appearance probably occurred during the rule of the
judge Tola, son of Puah, son of Dodo, over the children of Israel,
though it may have occurred during the rule of his predecessor
Abimelech, or during that of his successor Jair.[1] During one half of
the enormous interval between that time and 1811 the comet was rushing
outwards into space, reaching the remotest part of its path somewhere
about the year 278 (A.D.), and from that time to 1811 it was on its
return journey. It is strange to think, however, that though the
remotest part of its path lay 211 times farther from the sun than the
earth's orbit, yet even this mighty path, requiring more than 3000 years
for a single circuit, cannot be said to have carried the comet into the
star-depths. If the earth were to shift its position by the same
enormous amount the nearest fixed star would have its apparent position
changed only by about an eighth part of the apparent diameter of the sun
or moon, or by about one-quarter of the distance separating the middle
star of the Bear's tail from its close companion.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Comet of 1811.]

But this fact of itself is most strikingly suggestive of the vast
distance of the stars. For consider what it means. Imagine the middle
star of the Bear's tail to be the really nearest of all the stars
instead of lying probably twenty or thirty times farther away. Conceive
a comet belonging to that sun after making its nearest approach to it to
travel away upon an orbit requiring 3000 years for each circuit. _Then_
(supposing that star equal to our sun in mass), the comet, though
rushing away from its sun with inconceivable velocity during 1500 years,
would, at the end of that vast period, seem to be no farther away than
one-fourth of the distance separating the sun from its near companion.
Look at the middle star of the Bear's tail on any clear night, and on
its small satellite, remembering this fact, and the awful immensity of
the star depths are strongly impressed upon the mind. But the observer
must not fail to remember that the star really is many times more remote
than we have here for a moment supposed, and that such a comet's range
of travel would be proportionately reduced. Moreover, many among the
stars are, doubtless, hundreds, even thousands, of times still farther
away.

[Illustration: Fig. 5--Six-tailed Comet of 1744.]

Let us turn lastly to the amazing comet of the year 1744, pictured, at
the time, as shown in fig. 5 (though probably the drawing is greatly
exaggerated). We find that though it had the longest period of any which
has ever been assigned to a comet as the result of actual mathematical
calculation, yet its range in space would scarcely suffice to change the
position of the stars in such sort that the aspect of the familiar
constellations would be materially altered. Euler, the eminent
mathematician, calculated for this comet a period of 122,683 years,
which would correspond, I find, to a distance of recession equal to 2469
times the distance of the earth from the sun, or about eighty times the
distance of Neptune. Yet this is but little more than twelve times the
greatest distance of the comet of 1811. Probably the actual range of
such an orbit from the middle star of the Bear's tail would be equal in
appearance to the range described above on the supposition that the star
is no farther from us than the nearest known star (Alpha Centauri). That
is, such a comet, if it could be seen and watched during a period of
about 122,000 years, would seem to recede from the star to a distance
equal to about one-fourth the space separating it from its close
companion, and then to return to the point of nearest approach to its
ruling sun.

Such are the immensities of star-strewn space! The journey of a comet
receding from the sun with inconceivable velocity during hundreds of
thousands of years carries it but so small a distance from him compared
with the distance of the nearest star as scarcely to change the
appearance of the celestial landscape; and yet the distances separating
the sun from the nearest of his fellow suns are but as hair-breadths to
leagues when compared with the proportions of the scheme of suns to
which he belongs. These distances, though so mighty that by comparison
with them the inconceivable dimensions of our own earth sink into utter
nothingness, do not bring us even to the threshold of the outermost
court of that region of space to which the scrutiny of our telescopes
extends. Yet the whole of that region is but an atom in the infinity of
space.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] It might be suggested that the appearance of this blazing comet
among the stars drove the more superstitious of the Israelites at that
time to the worship of star-gods, as we read how, during the judgeship
of Jair, they "served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and
the gods of Moab, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the Lord
and served not Him." To a people like the Jews, who seem to have been in
continual danger of returning to the Sabaistic worship of their Chaldean
ancestors, the appearance of a blazing comet may have been a frequent
occasion of backsliding.




[Illustration]




III.

_OF THE INFINITELY MINUTE._


When I speak of the infinitely minute, I use the word infinitely not in
its absolute sense, but relatively. Actual infinity of minuteness is as
utterly beyond our conceptions as actual infinity of vastness. But we
may speak of what is very much less than the least object of which our
senses can make us directly conscious as _for us_ infinitely minute.
Among the greatest wonders science has to deal with are those relating
to bodies and movements thus beyond the direct ken of our senses. There
is a universe within the universe which our senses reveal to us,--a
universe whose structure is so fine that the minutest particle which the
microscope can reveal to us is, by comparison, like one of the suns
which people our universe compared with the unseen particles
constituting matter.

It is a strange thought that the objects constituting our universe, so
long regarded by man as the only universe, are in a sense pervaded by
the materials of an utterly different universe,--which yet is as
essential to our very existence as what we commonly call matter. We
cannot live without light and heat, for instance, and again, light and
heat affect matter as we know it; but they thus exist and affect such
matter by means only of a form of matter unlike any which we can
conceive. It is certain that if absolute vacancy separated our earth
from the sun, even by the narrowest imaginable gap, his heat and light
could never reach us. They could no more pass that vacant space than the
wave-motion of water can cross a space where water itself is wanting. It
is because of relations such as these that it has been said, and justly,
that matter is the less important half of the material constituting the
physical universe.

Our knowledge of this universe within our universe has been obtained
within comparatively recent years. Men were unwilling or at least they
spoke and thought as if they were unwilling, to believe that the
universe of matter which they had so long recognised was dependent on
another universe for its chief if not all its properties. They regarded
heat as some sort of substance, which might, with more delicate means
than they possessed, admit of being dealt with as chemists had dealt
with the gases. The sun was full of this fluid, this phlogiston, as it
was called. Light, in so far as it could be distinguished from heat, was
another fluid; electricity was another. These were the imponderables, or
unweighable substances of last century's science,--not as with us, the
effects of modes of motion taking place in a universe which, though
material, is yet not made of matter such as we know, or even such as we
can at present conceive.

This is the greatest of all human scientific marvels,--the greatest
because it includes all others. We know of a universe which is as
infinite in extent, and doubtless in duration, as our own universe;
which pervades all forms of matter: and yet we know of this universe
only indirectly; by the effects of movements taking place within it, not
by any perception of these movements themselves. Waves are ever beating
upon the shores of our material universe, and constantly changing the
form and condition of the coast line, but the waves themselves are
unseen. We only know of their existence through the changes wrought by
them.

We speak of the ether of space, and of waves traversing it, as though
the ether were simply some fluid very much more attenuated than the
rarest gas, even in a so-called vacuum. But in reality, so soon as we
attempt to apply to the movements taking place in such an ether the
mechanical considerations which suffice for the motions of all ordinary
forms of matter, we perceive that it must of necessity be utterly unlike
any kind of substance known to us. For instance, we find that though it
is like a gas in being elastic, its elasticity is infinite compared with
that of any material gas. Again, it is like a solid in retaining each of
its particles always very near to a fixed position; but again, no solid
we know of can be compared with it for a moment as respects this kind of
rigidity. It is at once infinitely elastic and infinitely rigid. We
cannot, for example, explain the phenomena of light unless we suppose
the elasticity of the ether at least 800,000,000,000 times greater than
the elasticity of air at the sea-level; and yet, as Sir J. Herschel long
since pointed out, every phenomenon of light points strongly to the
conclusion that none of the particles of the ether can be "supposed
capable of interchanging places, or of bodily transfer to any measurable
distance from their own special and assigned localities in the universe.
Again, how are we to explain the continuance of the ether in its present
condition, when we recognise the fact that a gas of similar elastic
power would expand in all directions with irresistible force,
diminishing correspondingly in density; yet the ether of space remains
always, so far as we can judge, absolutely unchanged in position. Its
characteristics certainly remained unchanged. Light travels at the same
rate now as it did last year, last century, a million years ago. The
ether, then, that bears it has presumably remained unchanged. If it were
gaseous, and bounded on all sides by vacuum, it would expand with
inconceivable velocity. To suppose it infinite in extent is to get rid
of the difficulty perfectly; but only by introducing a difficulty far
greater."[2]

A wonderful feature of the infinitely tenuous ether is, that while its
ultimate particles must be inconceivably more minute than the ultimate
atoms of ordinary matter, the movements taking place in it are
transmitted with enormous velocities. The structure of our universe is
on a grander scale; its least atom may comprise millions of millions of
the largest component portions of that infinitely tenuous ether. But
amid that ether motions are transmitted with velocities transcending all
but infinitely those which take place among the particles of matter
composing the universe in which we "live and move and have our being."
The planets, immense aggregates of matter such as we know it, sweep
onwards upon their immense orbits, traversing many thousands of miles in
an hour; but light and heat sweep along the ether of space, and by
virtue of motions taking place within that ether at the rate of many
tens of thousands of miles per second. The suns which people space rush
onwards with mightier momentum, but less swiftly than the planets in
their orbits. Comets attain the greatest velocities of all the bodies
that science deals with, rushing sometimes, in their periastral swoop,
with a velocity of hundreds of miles per second,--though yet in
mid-space the comets of widest orbital range lag slowly enough, insomuch
that some of those which, when nearest our sun, travel at the rate of
two or three hundred miles per second, move more slowly when very far
from him than many of our rivers. Taking even the swiftest rush of a
comet within the solar domain, we find that light speeds along five
hundred times more quickly,--so that if we represent the velocity of
light by that of an express train (reducing light's velocity in scale to
about one-10,000,000th part of its real value), the velocity of the
most swiftly-moving comet would be represented by that of a walk at the
rate of one-eighth of a mile per hour,--a very slow walk indeed.

It is not only amid the depths of space that these wonderfully swift
motions take place in the ethereal universe. As I have said, that
universe pervades ours throughout its entire extent. The densest of our
solids is as freely traversed by the ether as a forest by the summer
breeze. As the foliage of a thick forest may prevent the passage of
fierce winds, so may a solid body prevent the passage of
light-waves--though all solid bodies, as we know, do not prevent, and
some scarcely even modify, the passage of light. But substances which
prevent the passage of light are yet found capable of transmitting
ethereal motions of similar velocity. According to Wheatstone's
experiments electricity travels at the rate of more than 200,000 miles
per second along stout copper wire. Fizeau's experiments gave a lower
speed; but they did not negative Wheatstone's, the conditions not being
the same. Can anything be more wonderful than the thought of the
transmission of electricity with this enormous velocity? What really
happens we do not know. Perhaps if we were told what really takes place
between and among the particles of the wire, we should find ourselves
utterly unable to conceive it--for, as we have seen, the properties of
the ether, and, therefore, the processes taking place in the ethereal
universe, are probably unlike any within our experience. But this we
know--a certain condition of the molecules of the wire is transmitted,
by virtue of the ethereal medium pervading the wire, at a rate so
enormous that, if the wire itself could move at that rate, the force
required to bring its mass to rest would suffice to generate enough heat
to turn many times as much metal into the vaporous state.

Nay, even as regards the energy of their action on the matter of our
universe, these movements in the ethereal universe enormously exceed the
forces we are accustomed to regard as most powerful. The effects
produced by gravity, for instance, are almost evanescent compared with
those produced by heat. The sun's rays poured on a piece of metal for a
few minutes produce motions in every one of the ultimate particles of
the metal. Each particle vibrates with inconceivable rapidity (referring
to the rate at which the vibrations succeed each other), and with great
actual velocity of motion. Summing up the energy thus pervading the
piece of metal, we find that it incalculably exceeds the energy
represented by the velocity which the sun's attraction would communicate
in the same interval to that piece of metal, supposed to be entirely
under its influence at the earth's distance from the sun.

Or take another instance. "Think for a moment," say the authors of the
"Unseen Universe," "of the fundamental experiments in electricity and
magnetism, known to men for far more than 2000 years,--the lifting of
light bodies in general by rubbed amber and of iron filings by a
loadstone. To produce the same effect by gravitation-attraction,--at
least, if the attracting body had the moderate dimensions of a
hand-specimen of amber or loadstone,--we should require it to be of so
dense a material as to weigh, at the very least, 1,000,000,000 pounds,
instead of (as usual) a mere fraction of a pound. Hence it is at once
obvious that the imposing nature of the force of gravity, as usually
compared with other attractive forces, is due, not to its superior
qualitative magnitude, but to the enormous masses of the bodies which
exercise it."

We may put this illustration in another form. When we place a powerful
magnet near a piece of iron, say at a distance of one inch, and the
magnet lifts that piece of iron by virtue of its attractive power, a
contest has been waged, if one may so speak, between the attractive
powers of the small magnet and of the mighty earth, and the magnet has
conquered the earth. Now the magnet has been much nearer than the earth
to the piece of iron, for we know that the earth's attractive influence
has been the same as though the entire mass of the earth were gathered
at its centre, say 4000 miles from the piece of iron. A distance of 4000
miles contains 4000 times 1760 times thirty-six inches, or, roughly, 250
millions of inches. (This is in truth very near the true number of
inches in the earth's radius, insomuch that many suppose the inch to
have been originally taken as the 500,000,000th part of the earth's
diameter. A British inch is about one-500,000,000th part of the polar
diameter of the earth.) Since attraction diminishes as the square of the
distances increases, and _vice versâ_, it follows that if the earth's
entire mass could act on the piece of iron, at a distance of one inch,
the attraction would exceed that actually exerted by the earth 250
million times 250 million times, or 62,500 millions of millions of
times. In this degree, then, the earth is at a disadvantage compared
with the magnet as respects distance. And one-62,500,000,000,000,000th
part of the earth's mass would be capable of attracting the piece of
iron as strongly as the earth actually attracts it, if that fraction of
the earth's mass could exert its pull from a distance of only one inch.
But a 62,500,000,000,000,000th part of the earth would be an enormous
mass. It would weigh about 97,500 tons, or some 218 millions of pounds.
Thus a magnet which a child can lift exerts a greater attraction on the
piece of iron at the same distance than a mass at least 1000 million
times its weight could exert by its gravity only.

In fact we see from this illustration that gravity, though it produces
effects so tremendous, though it sways the moon round the earth, the
earth and all the other planets around the sun, and urges the sun and
his fellow-suns through space, is, after all, but a puny force in
itself. A child can lift his own weight against the attraction of the
mighty earth; and by combined strength as many children as would have a
weight equal to the earth's would easily bear a weight exceeding the
earth's, if the force could be wholly and directly applied to such
work.[3]

The attraction of gravity must, however, be regarded as only one
manifestation of the energies of the infinitely minute. It is in this
sense well worthy of careful study. I propose to present in a future
paper some of the strange thoughts which are suggested by the action of
this wonderful force, the range of whose activity is seemingly
co-extensive with the material universe.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] I do not say we can in any way avoid this far greater difficulty.
Our own material universe cannot even be conceived as limited in any way
save by void space of infinite extent; and it is as impossible for us to
conceive an infinite void as to conceive the infinite extension of
matter. Some modern mathematicians, indeed, assert that space is not
necessarily infinite, but they accompany the assertion (very justly)
with the admission that we cannot possibly conceive any boundary to
space; and as one of the things they ask mathematicians to admit is the
possibility that a straight line indefinitely produced both ways will at
length re-enter into itself, while another is the possibility that in
other parts of the universe two and two may make three or five, they are
not likely, I conceive, to persuade most mathematicians (profoundly
mathematical though they are themselves) that the mystery of infinity
has been as yet entirely expounded.

[3] Of course the reader will understand that when I here speak of the
earth's weight, I mean simply the pressure which would be exerted by the
quantity of matter contained in the earth, if each portion were only
subjected to an attractive force equal to that of gravity at the earth's
surface. The actual force with which the earth is drawn in any
direction, as a weight at the earth's surface is drawn downwards,
depends on the distance and mass of the attracting body as well as on
the mass of the earth; and strictly speaking, we ought not to say that
the earth weighs so many millions of tons, but that she contains so many
million times as much matter as a mass which at her surface weighs a
ton.




[Illustration]




IV.

_THE MYSTERY OF GRAVITY._


The law of gravity, or of the mutual attraction of masses of matter upon
each other, accounts so perfectly for all the observed motions of the
heavenly bodies, that we are apt to regard Newton's discovery of the
great law as though it had finally solved the mystery of these motions.
Many accept the verdict given by the poet Pope in the famous epitaph
which he suggested for Newton,--

    "Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night:
    God said, _Let Newton be!_ and all was Light."

But Newton, who probably knew as much about his work as Pope, was of
another opinion. Every one knows how he compared himself to a child who
had picked up a few shells on the shore, while the ocean of truth lay
unexplored before him. He has, however, spoken definitely of the great
discovery which has rendered his name illustrious, in terms which show
that _he_ did not find that all was light. Among the questions which he
specially would have had answered, amongst the secrets of nature
concealed beneath the ocean of truth, the mystery of gravity was
probably the chief. When Newton asked of the Ocean of Truth what Mrs.
Hemans later said, and in another sense, of the natural sea--

    "What hidest thou in thy treasure-caves and cells,
      Thou hollow-sounding and mysterious main?"

he had in his thoughts the very power which he is commonly supposed to
have explained, but which was in truth for him, more than for any man
that had ever lived, the mystery of mysteries.

It may be well to consider the very words of the great philosopher, so
far at least as our more diffuse language can present the concise
expressions of the original Latin:

"Hitherto we have explained," he says, "the phenomena of the heavens and
of our sea by the power of gravity, but have not yet assigned the cause
of this power. This is certain" (we must hearken attentively here, for
when a man like Newton speaks of aught as certain, we have sure ground
to go upon),--"this is certain, that it must proceed from a cause that
penetrates to the very centres of the sun and planets, without suffering
the least diminution of its forces; that operates, not according to the
quantity of surfaces of particles on which it acts (as mechanical causes
usually do), but according to the quantity of the solid matter which
they contain, and propagates its virtue on all sides to immense
distances, decreasing always as the squares of the distances.
Gravitation towards the sun is made up of the gravitations towards the
several particles of which the body of the sun is composed, and in
receding from the sun decreases accurately as the square of the
distances as far as the path of Saturn..., nay, and even to the
remotest parts of the paths of comets.... But hitherto I have not been
able to discover the cause of those properties of gravity from
phenomena; and I frame no hypotheses:[4] for, whatever is not deduced
from phenomena is to be called an hypothesis; and hypotheses, whether
metaphysical or physical, whether of occult qualities or mechanical,
have no place in experimental philosophy.... To us it is enough that
gravity does really exist, and act according to the laws which we have
explained, and abundantly serves to account for all the motions of the
celestial bodies and of our sea."

"Hitherto I have not been able to discover the cause of the properties
of gravity." Such is the simple statement of the man who discovered
those properties.

And now let us inquire a little into this law of gravity, not with the
hope of explaining this great mystery of nature,--though, for my own
part, I believe that the time is not far distant when the progress of
discovery will enable man to make this approach towards the mystery of
mysteries,--but in order to recognise the real nature of the mystery,
which is a very different thing from explaining it.

In the first place the study of gravity brings us at once to the
consideration of the infinitely minute,--at least of what is for us
practically infinite in its minuteness. If we consider the above
quotation attentively, we perceive that this quality of gravity was
recognised by Newton. "It is not the quantity of the surfaces of
_particles_," he says, "but the quantity of solid matter which they
contain," that gives to gravity its power. Gravity resides in the
ultimate particles of matter. We cannot conceive of matter so divided,
no matter how finely, that non-gravitating particles could be separated
from gravitating particles. Without entering into the question what
atoms are, we perceive that these ultimate constituents of matter must
contain, each according to the quantity of matter in it, the gravitating
energy. Only, observe how incongruously we are compelled to speak. (It
is always so when we deal with the infinite, whether the infinitely
great or the infinitely minute.) We are speaking of atoms as the
ultimate constituents of matter, and yet we are compelled, in describing
their gravitating energy, to speak of the quantity of matter contained
in each atom,--in other words, we speak in the same breath of an atom as
not admitting of being divided or diminished, and of its containing
matter by quantity, that is, by more or less. May we not, however,
reasonably accept both views? The reasoning is sound by which science
has proved that, so far as our material universe is concerned, there is
a limit beyond which the division of matter cannot be supposed to
go,--insomuch that Sir W. Thomson has indicated the actual limits of
size of the atoms composing matter. Yet, passing in imagination beyond
the bounds of our visible universe, and so entering into the next order
of universe below it (in scale of construction),--the ether of
space,--the atoms of our universe may be infinitely divisible in that
universe, may be, in fact, compared with _its_ particles, as the suns
and worlds of our universe are to our atoms and molecules.

But while gravity thus draws us to the contemplation of the infinitely
minute, it also leads us to the consideration of what is for us the
infinitely vast.

Newton was only able to speak confidently of the action of gravity at
the distance of Saturn, the remotest planet known in his day. He did,
indeed, refer to the comets as probably obeying, even in the remotest
parts of their paths, the force of the sun's gravity; but he could not
be certain on that point, because in his time no comet had been proved
to travel back to the sun after receding to the remotest portion of its
track. We now know not only that the sun's attraction extends to the
farthest parts of the solar system, having thus a domain in space nearly
thirty times larger than the sphere of Saturn, but we perceive that many
among the stars exert a similar force; for around them travel other
stars even as the planets travel around the sun. Thus we know that
gravity is exerted in regions lying hundreds of thousands of times
farther from the sun than Saturn is. We have, indeed, every reason to
believe, not only that star unto star extendeth this mysterious
attractive influence, but that the least particle in the inmost depths
of sun or world exerts in full force on each particle, even of suns
lying millions of times beyond the range of the most powerful telescope
yet constructed by man, the full energy corresponding (i.) to the
quantity of matter in itself and such particle, and (ii.) to the
distance separating each from each.

This is amazing enough; but there is something more perplexing and
mysterious in gravity even than this. Not only does gravity lead us to
consider the infinitely minute in space on the one hand, and the
infinitely vast in space on the other, but also it leads us to consider
the infinitely minute and the infinitely vast in time also, and this in
such a way as to suggest a difficulty which, as yet, no man has been
able to solve.

Light travels, as we know, with a velocity so enormous, that, by
comparison with it, all the velocities we are familiar with seem
absolutely as rest. But gravity acts so quickly that even the velocity
of light becomes as rest by comparison with the velocity of the
propagation of gravity. Laplace had occasion, now nearly a century ago,
to inquire whether a certain change in the moon's motion, by which she
seemed to be gradually hastening her motion round the earth, might not
be caused by the circumstance that gravity requires time for its action
to be propagated over great distances. He found that if the whole of
that change had to be explained in this way, which would be giving to
gravity the slowest admissible rate of transmission, the velocity with
which gravity is propagated would be _eight million_ times greater than
the velocity of light. If, on the other hand, that change in the moon's
motion could be satisfactorily explained in some other way, then the
velocity of gravity must be at least 16,000,000 times greater than the
velocity of light. He himself soon after discovered what was in his day
regarded as a complete explanation of the hastening of the moon's
motion; and though in our own time Adams of Cambridge has shewn that
only half the hastening can be accounted for by Laplace's reasoning, the
general explanation of the remaining half is that it is not a real
hastening of the moon, but is only an apparent hastening caused by the
gradual slowing of the earth's rate of turning on her axis. This makes
the _day_ by which we measure the moon's motion seem longer (very
slightly, however).[5] Supposing, however, half the moon's hastening
were left unexplained, and that the non-instantaneous transmission of
gravity were the only way of accounting for it, even then it would be
certain that gravity is propagated at a rate exceeding 12,000,000 times
the velocity of light.

Indeed, at present, owing to the more exact observations available, and
the greater range of time over which they extend, it may safely be said
that the rate of propagation of gravity is far greater than this. It is
even held by some that gravity acts instantaneously over any distance,
however vast.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

Although I cannot here indicate the exact nature of the reasoning by
which the enormous rapidity of the action of gravity is inferred, I must
briefly indicate the general argument, that the reader may not suppose
the matter to be merely speculative. Suppose that the action of gravity
were propagated at the same rate as light. Then the earth would feel the
pull of the sun eight minutes or so after she had been in the place
where the sun began to exert that particular pull. The direction of the
pull then would not be that of the straight line connecting the earth
and sun at the moment when the pull was felt, but that of the straight
line connecting the sun and the earth eight minutes or so before. For
instance, when the earth is at E_{1}, fig. 6, the sun at S would begin
to exert a pull in the line E_{1} S, but the earth would only feel this
pull when she got to E_{2}, her place eight minutes later, when it would
act upon her in the direction E_{2} F, parallel to E_{1} S. Now this
pull, E_{2} F, may be divided into two parts, one along E_{2} S, pulling
the earth towards the sun S, the other along E_{2} T in the earth's
course, _hastening her therefore_. But the maintenance by the earth of
the same constant track depends entirely on the action of gravity
sunwards. If there is any action in addition, hastening the earth, then
she will not keep her course,[6] but will travel in a constantly
widening path,--or, in a sort of spiral, very slowly retreating from the
sun, but retreating constantly. The change of distance would not be
measurable in millions of years; but the increase in the length of the
year _would_, before long, be observable. Because there is no such
increase, astronomers feel well assured that gravity is not only
propagated more swiftly than light, but many times, even, as we have
seen, many millions of times, more swiftly.

It is then in an infinitely minute time that the action of gravity
traverses all ordinary distances. The earth's pull on the moon takes
less than the 50,000,000th part of a second in reaching the moon,--and
the particles constituting the mass of the earth act on ourselves, and
on all the objects which lie near the earth's surface, in far less than
the 10,000,000th part even of this utterly minute time-interval.

Yet age after age has passed during which this infinitely active force
has been at work without diminution, and age after age will continue to
pass without any change in its activity. For millions of millions of
æons it has lasted and will last, so permanent is it; while its
operation is felt simultaneously at points millions of millions of
star-distances apart. What infinities of distance has this wonderful
attractive force traversed!

But even these considerations do not present the greatest of the marvels
of gravity. It is wonderful, indeed, to consider a form of attraction
possessed by the infinitely minute, and exerted over the infinitely
vast, operating in portions of time immeasurably small, and extending
its operations throughout time infinite. But the mystery of mysteries is
not here. The marvel of marvels is this, that, so far as we can
perceive, the force of gravity is exerted without any material
connection with the objects moved by it. Matter seems to act where it is
not, to use the phraseology of the schools. Of this "action at a
distance," Newton himself said, that it is inconceivable, that in point
of fact it is impossible. "No man," he said, "who has, in philosophical
matters, a competent faculty of thinking," can "for a moment believe
that a body can act through a vacuum, without the intervention of
anything else by or through which the force may be conveyed from one
body to another." Yet this is precisely what gravity seems to do. The
ether occupies, indeed, all space; but there is nothing at present known
to us by which we can understand how the ether can transmit the force of
gravity. The power of the ether in the rapid transmission of undulations
seems to attain its limit in the propagation of light and heat and
electricity at the rate of nearly 200,000 miles per second. How the
ether can act so as to serve as a medium of communication between bodies
at all distances, transmitting impressions 10,000,000 times faster, at
least, than light travels, nothing at present known to us enables us to
say. I have, in a lecture which I gave in America upon the mysteries of
the universe, indicated a way in which gravity may be conceived to be
generated and transmitted; and I may hereafter describe the conception
(based partly on the views of Le Sage). But it is only a conception.
There is no phenomenon (except the very form of attraction which has to
be explained) tending to show that the conception is correct And even
if it be accepted, it brings us face to face with only greater marvels.

At present, however, let this simply be said in conclusion--that the
apparent action of gravity at a distance is, of all physical wonders,
the greatest yet known to man. If we accept the opinion of Newton,
which, indeed, seems to me indisputable, that matter cannot act through
a vacuum, then we must admit the existence of properties, as yet
unthought of, in the ether of space, or in some still more subtle
universe permeating that ether. If, on the other hand, we accept the
belief that matter can act at a distance, then is there no miracle,
either of those believed in by mankind generally, or of those more
generally rejected, which exceeds in marvellousness this wonder of all
the wonders of physical science.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] The words of Newton, "Hypotheses non fingo," have been often quoted
in such sort as to give an entirely incorrect idea of his real opinion
as to the relation between theoretical and practical science. As too
commonly understood, they would, in fact, make his discovery of
gravitation a great exception to his own rule. They must be taken in
connection with his definition of a hypothesis, as "whatsoever is not
deduced from phenomena." It is a part of true science, nay, it is the
highest office of the student of science to deduce theories from
phenomena. Such research stands as high above the simple observation of
phenomena as architecture stands above brick-making or stone-cutting.
But to frame hypotheses as the old Greeks did, trusting to the power of
the understanding independently of the observation of phenomena, is to
make bricks without straw and to build with them upon the sand.

[5] The point is explained in a paper called "Our Chief Timepiece Losing
Time," in the first series of my "Light Science for Leisure Hours."

[6] In the popular, but incorrect way of speaking, the balance between
the centrifugal and the centripetal force will no longer be maintained:
the increase of velocity will give the centrifugal force the advantage,
and it will slowly draw the body away from the centre. In reality there
is no centrifugal _force_, the only force acting on the earth in her
course round the sun being the sun's attraction upon her, which,
however, must keep bending her course from the straight line, if she is
to maintain her distance. In the case above imagined it would not bend
her course actively enough.




[Illustration]




V.

_THE END OF MANY WORLDS._


A sign has recently appeared in the heavens which has been interpreted
in a way suggesting that many worlds like our own have undergone a
terrible catastrophe, every living creature upon them being consumed as
by fire. I propose briefly to consider some of the thoughts suggested by
this strange event.

It is difficult when we look at the star-lit heavens, suggestive as they
are of solemn peace, to conceive the stupendous energy, the fierce
uproar and tumult, of which even the faintest visible star in reality
tells us. Pythagoras spoke of the harmony of the celestial spheres,
which we are only prevented from hearing by its continuity. "There's not
the smallest orb which thou beholdest," said the science of the middle
ages,

    "But in his motion like an angel sings,
    Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubim."

The science of our own time tells us a still stranger story. There's not
the smallest orb which thou beholdest, she says, but in his motion
throbs like a mighty heart, still pulsating life to the worlds which
circle round it. But while our powers of vision are limited to the
narrow range of our present telescopes, we cannot watch the action of
these great centres of energy, nor can we hope that the uproar of those
remote fires will ever reach mortal ears, though to the mind's ear clear
and distinct. It is no longer a mere fancy that each star is a sun.
Science has made this an assured fact, which no astronomer thinks of
doubting. We know that in certain general respects each star resembles
our sun. Each is glowing like our sun with an intense heat. Around each,
as around our sun, are the vapours of many elements. In each the fires
are maintained, as they are maintained in our sun, in some way which may
be partly mechanical, partly chemical, but which certainly does not in
the least resemble combustion. We know that in each star processes
resembling in violence those taking place in our own sun must be
continually in progress, and that such processes must be accompanied by
a noise and tumult compared with which all the forms of uproar known
upon our earth are as absolute silence. The crash of the thunderbolt,
the bellowing of the volcano, the awful groaning of the earthquake, the
roar of the hurricane, the reverberating peals of loudest thunder, any
of these, or all combined, are as nothing compared with the tumult
raging over every square mile, every square yard, of the surface of each
one among the stars.

If we remember this when we hear of stars varying in brightness, we
shall perceive that the least change which could be recognised from our
remote stand-point must represent an accession or falling off of energy
corresponding to far more than all the energies existing on our earth,
or indeed on all the members of the solar system taken together.
Astronomers recognise our sun as in one sense a variable star; for we
can hardly suppose that he shines with the same degree of brilliancy
when many spots mark his surface as when he is quite free from spots;
and astronomers know that these changes in the sun's condition
correspond to wonderful changes in his activity. When spots are most
numerous, the coloured flames rage with fierce energy over his whole
globe, metallic vapours are shot forth from below his visible surface
with velocities of many miles per second. Whereas, when he has no spots,
the coloured flames sink down from their former height of tens of
thousands of miles, till they are but a few thousand miles in height;
while metallic vapours are seldom emitted, and never to the same height,
or with the same velocity, as when the spots are most numerous. But
though the sun thus varies in condition, and probably in his total
brightness, we cannot suppose that such variations could be recognised
from the distance of even the nearest among the fixed stars. What, then,
must be the nature of changes taking place in a star, that we, at our
enormous distance, should be able to recognise them! We may well believe
that the entire aspect of such a star must be changed to the
inhabitants, if such there are, of worlds circling around them.

If, however, the changes taking place in stars, whose variations of
brightness can just be recognised, must be amazing, how stupendous must
be the changes affecting a star which alternates from brightness to
invisibility, like Mira, the Star Wonderful, in the constellation of the
Whale! how destructive those affecting a star like Eta, of the ship
Argo, which has varied from the fourth magnitude to a lustre nearly
equalling that of Sirius, and thence to the lowest limit of visibility,
in the course of the last hundred years!

Even these changes, however, though justly regarded as among the chief
wonders and mysteries of the star-depths, seem in turn to sink into
nothingness by comparison with the sudden appearance of a new star, as
interpreted by modern scientific observations. Of old, when a new star
appeared, it was thought for awhile to be a fresh creation; a new sun
set in the centre of a new system of worlds,--a thought which was not
then so startling as in our own times it would be reckoned. When the new
star was seen slowly to die out until at last it became invisible, men
were content to regard it as a sign set in the heavens for a special
purpose. Nor did they find much difficulty in associating such a
phenomenon with some event of importance occurring during its
continuance, or soon after the new star had died out. Such were the
explanations offered respecting the exceedingly bright star which made
its appearance in the constellation Cassiopeia in the year 1572. The
place in which it appeared is shown in fig. 7. It must have sprung into
its full glory in a very short time, for Tycho Brahé, the celebrated
astronomer, tells us that, returning on November 1, 1572, from his
laboratory to his dwelling-house, he saw the new star, which he was
certain had not been visible an hour before, shining more brightly than
any before seen. It surpassed all the stars in the heavens in
brilliancy, and even Jupiter when that planet is at its brightest. Only
Venus at her brightest was superior to the new star. For three weeks it
shone with full lustre, after which it began slowly to decline. Being
situated in a part of the heavens always above the horizon (for
European observatories), the star's entire history could be followed. It
remained for sixteen months steadfast in its position like the other
stars. As it decreased in size it varied in colour. "At first," says an
old writer; "its light was white and extremely bright; it then became
yellowish; afterwards of a ruddy colour like Mars; and finished with a
pale, livid white, resembling the colour of Saturn."

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--Cassiopeia; showing where a new star appeared in
the year 1572.]

In passing it may be remarked that there are reasons for expecting the
return of Tycho Brahé's star in the course of a few years. For other
new stars have been recorded as seen in the same part of the heavens in
the years 945 and 1264, and though the interval from 945 to 1264 (or 319
years) exceeds by 11 years the interval from 1264 to 1572 (or 308
years), yet the difference is but small by comparison with either entire
interval; and we may not unreasonably believe that the three new stars
seen in Cassiopeia have been only three apparitions of one and the same
star, which shines out, with superior lustre, for a few months, once in
a period averaging about 313 years. It seems to me not at all unlikely
that, some time during the next twenty years, astronomers will have an
opportunity of examining, with the telescope and spectroscope, a star
which last appeared before either instrument had been invented.

Already facts are known respecting the so-called new stars which will
not permit us to accept the explanations of old so readily offered and
admitted, simply because so little was certainly known.

In the year 1866 a star appeared suddenly in the constellation of the
Northern Crown, where no star had before been visible to the naked eye.
It was a little below the arc of stars forming the celestial coronet.[7]


It shone as a second magnitude star when first seen, but very rapidly
diminished in lustre. It increased our knowledge in two important
respects.

First, on examining Argelander's charts of the northern heavens, the new
star was found to have been observed and charted as a tenth magnitude
star, that is, four magnitudes below the lowest limit of naked eye
vision. It was not, then, a new sun, though it might still truly be
called a new star, in this sense, that it was a new member of the set of
stars which adorn our skies as seen by ordinary vision.

In the second place, the star was subject to the searching scrutiny of
spectroscopic analysis, with results of a most interesting character.

The reader is no doubt aware that when the light of a star is analysed
into its component colours by the instrument called the spectroscope, it
is found that all the colours of the rainbow are present, as in the case
of solar light, but (also in the sun's case) not all the tints of these
colours. Certain dark lines athwart the rainbow-tinted streak, called
the _spectrum_ of the star, indicate the presence of absorbing vapours
in the star's atmosphere. This general statement is true of every fixed
star, though the dark lines of some stars differ in number and position
from the dark lines of others, showing that other absorbing vapours are
present. In the case of the new star in the Crown, the usual stellar
spectrum was shewn,--a rainbow-tinted streak crossed by a number of dark
lines. But besides these, there were seen four very bright lines,--lines
so bright that the rainbow-tinted streak appeared as a dark background.
The meaning of this is well understood by spectroscopists. It signifies
that besides the vapours which, being cooler than the star, absorbed a
portion of its light, and produced the dark lines, some vapours were
present in the star's atmosphere which were a great deal hotter than the
star, and so produced bright lines. Now two of the lines corresponded in
position with two of the well known lines of the gas hydrogen, showing
that this was one of the gases which had been raised to an unusual
degree of heat.

It was inferred that there had been some tremendous disturbance in that
remote star, by which the hydrogen and some other vapours present in its
atmosphere had been intensely heated. But astronomers were unable to
decide whether the disturbance was of the nature of a conflagration, the
hydrogen actually burning, or whether the heat was occasioned in some
other way, as by the downfall of some immense mass upon that remote
sun. For burning hydrogen and glowing hydrogen, though either could give
the observed bright lines, are very different things. In the former case
a chemical change is taking place, as in the case of burning wood or
coal; the latter case resembles that of redhot iron, which is not
burning itself (not changing into a different form as everything does
which burns), though it will burn other things,--in the ordinary, and
incorrect, use of the expression.

The general belief was that there had been a downfall of matter on the
star in the Crown, by which the whole globe of that sun had been excited
to an intense degree of heat, especially at the surface, near which lies
the hydrogen atmosphere of the star.

I must leave, however, to the next part, the further consideration of
the strange thoughts suggested by the outburst of this star. I wish to
use the small space remaining at present to indicate the place where
another new star burst forth last November, so that any readers of these
pages who have telescopes may know where to look for a sun which is now
dying out, but was shining a few weeks ago as a third magnitude star.
Fig. 8 presents a portion of the well-known constellation Cygnus or the
Swan. Any star atlas will indicate the place of the lettered stars shown
in the figure. The constellation itself does not show at all well at
this season of the year.[8] The part shown in the figure is close to the
horizon, and directly under the pole-star, at about half-past ten in the
middle of February; but a little higher up, between north and
north-east, at midnight. Professor Schmidt, of the Athens Observatory,
noticed a new star, in the place shown, on November 24th last. It must
have shone out suddenly, for Schmidt had been observing in that region
on the night of November 22nd (the last preceding clear night). It has
since gradually faded, until now a small telescope is required to show
it, shining as a seventh magnitude star, with a well-marked orange tint.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--Part of Cygnus, showing the place of new star
(November 24, 1876).]

We have now to consider the history of this star, and discuss the
general questions suggested by the sudden blazing out of suns which had
for many years, and probably for many centuries, shone continuously with
a far feebler lustre. It is clear that we have good reason to be
interested in these questions, seeing that, for aught we know, our sun
may be one of those exposed to sudden great increase of lustre.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seems certain, in the first place, that this star leapt very suddenly
to its full splendour. Schmidt had been observing the same regions of
the heavens only two evenings before, and is sure the star was not then
shining visibly to the naked eye. Again, astronomy is now studied by so
many persons, and so many more who are not students of astronomy are now
well acquainted with the constellations, that it is very difficult for a
new star to shine many hours without being detected. For example, the
new star in the Crown, which appeared in May, 1866, though not so well
placed for observation, was detected by many observers at widely distant
stations within a few hours of each other. It is probable that the star
acquired its full lustre in a few hours at the utmost, and quite
possible that, had any one been watching the place where the star
appeared, he would have been able to see the star grow into full
brightness by visible change of lustre, just as the lustre of a
revolving light in a distant lighthouse visibly waxes and wanes. It may
be, of course, that the increase of the star from its ordinary lustre,
up to the stage when first it was visible to the naked eye, occupied
many days, or even many months or years; but it seems more likely that
as the later stages of increase were rapid, so also was the entire
development of the new lustre. In that case, if there were inhabited
worlds circling around that remote sun, they had but brief warning of
the fate in store for them, as presently to be described.

Like the star in the Northern Crown, the new star in Cygnus was
subjected to the searching scrutiny of the spectroscope. The results,
though similar in general respects, were even more interesting than in
the case of the brighter new star. In the interval between 1866 and 1876
spectroscopic analysis has developed largely. It has thus become
possible to analyse more completely the light even of faint stars than
the light of bright stars could be analysed a decade of years since.

The spectrum of the new star as examined by M. Cornu, of the Paris
Observatory, showed the bright lines of hydrogen, indicating the
presence of enormous quantities of glowing hydrogen, in a state of
intense heat. But beside these bright lines, others also could be seen.
One of these was an orange-yellow line. It will be understood that the
faint spectrum of a star cannot be so readily lengthened by increasing
the dispersion as a bright spectrum; for with too great dispersion the
light fades out altogether. And though this is not strictly the case
with the bright lines, which are merely thrown farther apart by
dispersion, yet still it remains true that one cannot deal with a star
spectrum even of bright lines as one can with the solar spectrum. So
that M. Cornu was not able to determine whether the orange-yellow line
belonged to sodium, or to that other substance, whatever it may be,
which produces the orange-yellow line seen in the spectrum of a solar
prominence.[9] Another bright line, green in colour, agreed in position
with a triple line belonging to the metal magnesium. Lastly, a bright
yellowish-green line was seen, which is known to be present in the
spectrum of the sun's corona and of the low-lying ruddy matter round the
sun, called the _sierra_ by some, and by others (apparently unfamiliar
with the Greek language) the chromosphere.

Now all this agrees very well with what had been noticed in the case of
the star in the Northern Crown. For, unquestionably, if a sun increases
so much in heat and lustre that the hydrogen outside it glows more
brightly than the body of the star, then other matter _outside_ that sun
might also be expected to share the great increase of heat. We see that,
outside our own sun, hydrogen, a certain unknown vapour of an orange
yellow colour, magnesium, and another unknown vapour of greenish-yellow
colour are present in enormous quantities; and it seems, therefore,
reasonable to believe that other suns have these gases extending far
outside the rest of their substance. It is certain that, if our sun were
caused to glow with far more than its present degree of heat, the gases
whose increase of brightness would be most discernible from a distant
station (as a world circling around some remote star) would be just
those gases which were glowing so resplendency around the star in Cygnus
last November--or rather at the time when that light which reached us
last November set out from the remote star in the Swan.

When we view the outburst of that remote sun in this way the thoughts
suggested are not altogether satisfactory. That sun shows far too much
resemblance to our own, and behaved, so far as can be judged, far too
much as our own sun would behave if roused to many times its present
degree of heat and splendour. When we hear of a railway accident it is a
matter of special interest to us (if we travel much) to learn whether
the conditions under which the accident took place resembled those under
which the trains proceed by which we chiefly travel. When an express
train suffers in such a way as to show some special danger arising from
great velocity, we find ourselves to some degree concerned personally in
the investigation which follows, if we travel generally by quick trains.
If a bridge breaks down, and we have often to traverse bridges in
railway journeying, we are similarly concerned, especially if any of the
bridges we have to cross resemble in structure the one which has given
way. So also of many other special forms of danger in railway
travelling. Now, on the same principle, we cannot but regard with
considerable interest the circumstance that, apparently, a catastrophe
has taken place in the star in Cygnus, which has not only affected a sun
resembling our own very closely in constitution, but has produced
effects very closely corresponding to those which would affect our own
sun if, through any cause, he were excited to many times his present
degree of heat.

Let us pause a little to reflect upon the effects which would follow a
great increase of the sun's lustre. A change in our own sun, such as
affected the star in Cygnus, or that other star in the Northern Crown,
would unquestionably destroy every living creature on the face of this
earth; nor could any even escape which may exist on the other planets of
the solar system. The star in the Northern Crown shone out with more
than 800 times its former lustre: the star in Cygnus with from 500 to
many thousand times its former lustre, according as we take the highest
possible estimate of its brightness before the catastrophe, or consider
that it _may_ have been very much fainter. Now, if our sun were to
increase tenfold in brightness, all the higher forms of animal life and
nearly all vegetable life would inevitably be destroyed on this earth. A
few stubborn animalcules might survive, and, possibly, a few of the
lowest forms of vegetation, but naught else. If the sun increased a
hundredfold in lustre his heat would doubtless sterilise the whole
earth. The same would happen in other planets. The heat falling on the
remotest members of the solar system would not, indeed, be excessive
according to our conceptions. But if we regard Neptune, Uranus, Saturn,
and Jupiter as the abode of life (which, for my own part, I consider
altogether improbable), we cannot but suppose the orders of living
creatures in each of these planets to be well fitted to exist under the
conditions subsisting around them. If this is so--as who can for a
moment doubt?--a sudden enormous increase in the sun's heat, though not
making the supply received by those planets much greater than, or even
equal to, the supply which we receive from the sun, would prove as fatal
to living creatures there as to living creatures on our earth.

If, then, the sun increased in splendour as the stars have increased
which the astronomers call new stars or temporary stars, there would be
an end of life upon this earth; and nothing short of either the
spontaneous development of life, or of the creation of various forms of
life, could people our earth afresh. Science knows nothing of
spontaneous generation, and believers in revelation reject the doctrine.
Science knows nothing of the creation of living forms, but believers in
revelation accept the doctrine. Certain it is that if our sun ever
undergoes the baptism of fire which has affected some few among his
brother suns, one or other of these processes (if creation can be called
a process) must come into operation, or else our earth and her companion
worlds would for ever after remain absolutely devoid of life.

But if our sun, without suffering so great a change, underwent a change
of less degree, it might well happen that though there would be enormous
destruction of life upon the earth and other planets, some life
(presumably the strongest and best) would survive. In that case, after a
long period of time, the earth would again be well peopled, and it might
even be that the various races of terrestrial creatures would be
improved, by the desolation which the great solar conflagration had
wrought.

It is somewhat curious, considering how little there is in the ordinary
progress of events to suggest the idea, that most of the ancient systems
of cosmogony recognised the periodical destruction of living creatures
on the earth by fire as well as by water. Each form of destruction was
supposed to be brought about by planetary influences. The Ecpyrosis, or
destruction by fire, was effected when all the planets were in
conjunction with Cancer; the Cataclysm, or destruction by flood, when
all the planets were in conjunction with Capricorn. Each form of
destruction was supposed also to purify the human race. "Towards the
termination of each era," writes Lyell, speaking of these old ideas,
"the gods could no longer bear with the wickedness of men, and a shock
of the elements or a deluge overwhelmed them; after which calamity
Astrea again descended on the earth, to renew the golden age." The
Greeks undoubtedly borrowed all such doctrines from the Egyptians, who
"believed the world to be subject to occasional conflagrations and
deluges, whereby the gods arrested the career of human wickedness, and
purified the earth from guilt. After each regeneration mankind was in a
state of virtue and happiness, from which they gradually degenerated
again into vice and immorality."

Considering that we have every reason to believe the records of great
floods to relate to events which actually occurred, however imperfectly
remembered, it seems not unreasonable to believe that the tradition of
great heats had its origin in observed phenomena. As neither ordinary
conflagrations nor volcanic outbursts would have suggested traditions of
the kind, it would seem not impossible that at certain times our sun may
have acquired for a time unusual lustre and heat, causing great and
widely spread destruction among all forms of animal and vegetable life.

This idea may possibly seem to many, especially at a first view, too
wild to be entertained for a moment. Our sun shines, so far as appears
to ordinary observation, with steadfast lustre from year to year, and
also from age to age. If an occasional hot season suggests for a while
to some that the sun has grown hotter, or a cool season that he has
grown cooler, the restoration of cool or warmer weather, as the case may
be, causes the thought to be quickly cast on one side that a change of
either kind has taken place. Again, if we examine the historical records
of past ages, we find little to suggest the idea, or even the
possibility, that the sun in former times shone with greater splendour
or with less than at present. The men of those days were formed like the
men of our own day, and could not have supported any much greater degree
of heat or of cold than men can support at present. Any sudden accession
(or diminution) of solar light and heat, such as we are considering,
would certainly have attracted marked attention, and have been recorded
for the benefit of future ages. The geologic record, again, does,
indeed, suggest variations in the sun's emission of heat as constituting
one among the few available explanations of the existence of tropical
forms of life in certain strata and of arctic forms in other strata. But
even if this explanation be the true one, which is by no means
established, such variations must of necessity have been slow, the
condition of increased heat continuing for many ages in succession, and
the like with the condition of diminished heat. We have no evidence,
historical or geological, of the occurrence of any sudden accession of
solar heat, followed by a quick return to the normal temperature, unless
we find such evidence in the tradition prevalent among Egyptian, Indian,
and Chinese cosmogonists, that at certain recurring epochs in the past
our earth has undergone destruction and renovation by fire.

Yet, as I shall now show, it appears that the one only natural
interpretation which can be given of the outburst of a new or temporary
sun indicates an event which might happen to our own sun, and an event
which if it happened at all would happen periodically. Moreover, while
it will appear that there is no reason for fearing the possible
occurrence (which would, in such case, be really the recurrence) of such
a catastrophe in the case of our own sun as has affected the stars in
the Crown and in Cygnus, there is no reason for rejecting as incredible
the idea that catastrophes very serious in their character may have
affected our sun; and there is abundant reason for believing that
_small_ alterations in the sun's total emission of light and heat take
place very often, in some cases periodically; in others--so far as we
can yet judge--periodically.

Lastly, it will be seen that there is always a possibility that our own
or any other sun may undergo precisely such a change as the stars in
Cygnus and the Northern Crown. Some indeed, even among men of science
(as the Abbé Moigno, for example) believe that it was an event of this
sort which St. Peter predicted when he wrote, that as the old world,
being overflowed with water, perished, so "the heavens and the earth
which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire."
According to that view, the day of destruction will come "as a thief in
the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the
works that are therein shall be burned up."

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us consider how the sudden brightness of a new star may be
explained.

I must confess that for my own part I do not attach much weight to the
suggestion once made by Mr. Huggins, that an actual conflagration had
taken place in the case of the new star in the Northern Crown. It does
not seem to me that any process of mere burning could account for the
enormous accession of light and heat which that sun underwent.

Consider the case of our own sun. His heat is very far beyond that which
would be given out by any matter known to us undergoing any known
process of true combustion. That is to say, if a mass as large as the
sun of any known substance were caused to burn, under any conditions we
can imagine, the momentary emission of heat by that mass would be very
much less than the momentary emission of heat by the sun.

Now it is quite conceivable that by some great accession of combustible
matter, some supply of fuel exceeding many times his entire mass, the
sun's entire emission of heat might be very largely increased. But
though such an idea is conceivable, it seems altogether far-fetched. The
conception is, in fact, inadmissible as an explanation of the increase
of heat of a temporary star, not because of the improbability of the
sudden accession of so enormous a quantity of matter (though that
improbability is very great), but because if so enormous a quantity of
matter fell upon the sun, many times as much heat would be generated by
the mechanical effect of the impact as by the combustion of the freshly
received matter. So that even with the daring assumption here made,
combustion would account for only a small portion of the increase of
light and heat.

Huggins' idea was indeed somewhat different. He supposed that in
consequence of some great internal convulsion of the sun in the Northern
Crown a large volume of hydrogen and other gases was evolved from the
interior, the hydrogen then by burning giving out the light
corresponding to the bright lines. At the same time, the mass of the sun
would be intensely heated by the surrounding mass of glowing hydrogen.
When the liberation of gas from the interior ceased the flame would die
out, and the sun's surface would gradually cool. But if we judge by the
case of our own sun, the heat of the _burning_ hydrogen would be nothing
near so great as the heat of the glowing hydrogen already outside and
within the visible globe of a sun.

On the whole it seems altogether more probable that the accession of
splendour observed in the case of temporary stars is due to the downfall
of enormous masses of matter upon the surface of these suns. It is, no
doubt, well known to most of my readers that the downfall of meteoric
matter upon the surface of our own sun has been considered a sufficient
explanation of the sun's entire emission of light and heat. The theory
that the sun's heat and light _are_ thus excited has long since been
abandoned; but not because the cause would be insufficient. It has been
abundantly proved that a downfall of meteors, not sufficient in quantity
to add appreciably to the sun's size in many thousands of years, would
generate more heat and light than he emits in that time. The meteoric
theory has been abandoned simply because it has been shown that no such
downfall is taking place.

The reason why meteoric impact would suffice to warm the sun to his
present temperature if the meteoric showers were heavy, and to warm him
far beyond his present temperature if for a few days very heavy
meteoric showers fell upon him, is simply that his attraction upon
matter approaching him from without is capable of generating a
tremendous velocity. We know that when a cannon-ball strikes a metal
target, with a velocity perhaps of some 400 yards per second, great heat
is excited, and there is a momentary flash of light. If the velocity
were doubled, the quantity of heat would be doubled also. Conceive,
then, the tremendous heat which would be excited if a cannon-ball could
be caused to strike a target with a velocity exceeding that just named
some 1500 times! The ball and target would both be vaporised by the
shock, if--which, however, could never happen--the target resisted the
blow and brought the ball to rest. Now matter which reaches the sun from
without, under the influence of his tremendous attraction, strikes his
globe with a velocity 1500 times greater than that of a cannon ball
striking a target at a distance of two or three hundred yards. The heat
excited is, therefore, very intense; and if meteors were showering at
all times and in dense flights upon the sun's surface, we should require
no other explanation of the sun's heat.

But it appears that meteoric systems are neither so numerous nor so rich
as to account for the sun's uniform emission of heat, though occasional
meteoric showers upon the sun may be heavy enough to increase
appreciably the amount of heat he emits. It would seem, from
experiments which have been made by Professor Piazzi Smyth, of the
Edinburgh Observatory, and later by the Astronomer Royal at Greenwich,
that from time to time the sun's emission of heat really is greater than
usual. It seems not at all improbable that the increase is due to the
occasional fall of large masses of meteors in great numbers upon the
sun.

Again, it seems that such falls occur periodically, or rather that at
regular intervals great meteoric streams pour upon the sun's surface.
For instance, the periodic increase and decrease in the number of
sun-spots is accompanied (so far as we can judge by the observations
made at Edinburgh and Greenwich) by an accession and diminution of the
solar heat; and if the change is attributed to the passage of a meteoric
stream athwart the sun, we should have to assign to such a stream a
period of rather more than eleven years. This, from what we know about
the association between meteors and comets, would correspond simply to
the existence of a comet whose path intersects the sun's globe, and
which is followed by a train of millions of large meteoric masses, many
of which are consumed at each passage of the rich portion of the train
athwart the globe of the sun. This comet must of necessity be
inconspicuous, since it has hitherto escaped detection. In fact, its
head and nucleus must long since have been entirely destroyed. Only the
meteoric train, far more widely scattered, remains, simply because at
each passage past the sun, though many are captured, far greater numbers
get safely past.

I am careful to remind the reader that though I have, for convenience,
used the indicative mood in describing these matters, I am in reality
presenting merely a theory. It may be that the solar spots and the
accessions of heat are produced in some other way. But I must admit I
find strong reasons for regarding as probable the general theory, that
the alternations of solar activity (not the solar activity itself be it
noted) are excited from without. And since we know, as a matter of fact,
that meteors exist in enormous numbers within the solar system, and that
they aggregate with rapidly increasing density in the sun's
neighbourhood, we must believe that they fall upon the sun in enormous
numbers. We also perceive that the supply cannot be uniform, but must
vary greatly from time to time; while what we know about the periodicity
of meteoric showers on our own earth suggests the belief, we may almost
say the certainty, that there must be periodic downfalls of very heavy
meteoric showers upon the sun's surface. We have, then, strong
probability in favour of the belief that events may occur which, _if_
they occurred, might be expected, with a high degree of probability, to
produce effects resembling those actually observed,--viz., the
production of a heat more intense than usual, accompanied by signs of
great disturbance like the sun-spots. It does, therefore, seem at least
not improbable that these accessions of heat and these signs of great
disturbance really are brought about in the way supposed.

A further argument in favour of the meteoric origin of solar
alternations of heat is to be found in the fact that, on one occasion at
least, a solar phenomenon, corresponding precisely to what we should
expect to see, if great meteoric masses fell upon the sun, has been
followed by precisely the same signs of terrestrial disturbance which
accompany and follow the formation of great solar spots. I refer to the
remarkable occurrence witnessed by Carrington and Hodgson (at different
observatories) in September, 1859, when two intensely bright points of
light were seen travelling beside each other at the rate of about 120
miles per second along a short arc of the sun's surface,--an arc only
equal in length to some four-and-a-half times the diameter of our earth.

On that occasion the emission of solar heat may or may not have been
increased in an appreciable degree for several minutes. My own belief is
that it must have been; but we certainly have no means of proving that
it was. What we do know certainly is, that on that day all the
phenomena which usually accompany the existence of many and large
sun-spots showed themselves with exaggerated intensity. The magnetic
needle was greatly disturbed, auroras displayed their coloured streamers
in both hemispheres, telegraphic communication was interrupted, and
everything tended to show that a disturbance of the same general
character as that which produces sun-spots, but much more active while
it lasted, had affected the sun. It seems, then, altogether reasonable
to infer that sun-spots are due to the same cause as the disturbance
which then occurred. So that if we conclude, with most astronomers
competent to form an opinion, that the disturbance witnessed by
Carrington and Hodgson was due to the downfall of two very large
meteoric masses upon the sun, it would follow that sun-spots are due to
more wide-spread meteoric showers, not consisting of masses so large.

The reader will long since have guessed, no doubt, to what all this
tends. If the periodical variations of the sun's surface are due to
meteoric and cometic systems whose orbits intersect the sun's globe,
their periods being short (that is, lasting but a few years), it may
well be that more important meteoric and cometic systems intersecting
the sun's globe exist, which have much longer periods. When next one of
these makes its passage athwart the sun, far more important solar
disturbances may take place than those which occur when the regularly
recurring systems salute the sun. Two or three times in the history of
science comets have approached very close to the surface of the sun, as
in 1680, and again in 1843, but without actually impinging upon it. Very
slight changes in the motions of those comets, owing to the disturbing
influences of the planets, would cause their very nuclei to strike the
sun, and their meteoric trains to pour afterwards in a full stream upon
him for many days, or even for many months and years in succession.

Now I do not think our sun would necessarily suffer very much from any
of these known comets. They may long since have parted with the greater
quantity of their substance. But it is quite possible that even one of
those well-known comets of the solar system might cause very serious
outbursts of solar heat and light; and it is certainly not only possible
but extremely probable that other comets, such as have visited the solar
system on paths fortunately not bringing them near to the sun, would
have worked much mischief had their paths been differently situated.

We know that Newton held this opinion. He considered the real danger
from comets to reside, not in the possibility that one might strike our
earth, but in the possibility that one, falling upon the sun, might
excite that orb to a degree of heat so intense that all life on this
earth would be destroyed. It is true that, in Newton's time, physical
laws were not so well understood as at present, and a considerable
portion of Newton's reasoning was consequently inexact. But nothing
which is now known opposes itself to the belief which Newton adopted on
this subject. On the contrary, whereas Newton only recognised the danger
arising from the consumption of a comet as fuel for the sun, we now
recognise a far more serious danger, from the force of meteoric impact,
and the heat excited as the thermal equivalent of the destroyed
velocities. Of this part of the danger Newton had no clear conception,
the relations between mechanical energy and heat not having been
established until quite recent times.

It appears to me, however, that the danger in the case of our own
sun--or may we not say _our_ danger?--arises only from the possibility
that some one of the comets which visit us from the star-depths may make
straight for the sun; and this danger is exceedingly small. Almost
certainly a comet which, leaving the domain of another sun, falls under
the attractive influence of our own, would approach him on a path
passing many millions of miles from his surface. The chances against a
more direct approach are so great that they may be regarded as, to all
intents and purposes, overwhelming. A comet _might_ visit us from the
star-depth on a destructive course, just as a single black ball _might_
be drawn at the first trial from a bag containing a million white balls
and only that single black one. But the danger is exceedingly small.

We see, indeed, that other suns have suffered in this way, assuming
cometic downfall to be the true cause of stellar outbursts. There are so
many millions of suns, however, in the region of space to which
telescopic survey extends that the occurrence of ten or twelve such
outbursts in the course of four or five centuries need not be regarded
as implying any serious danger. Moreover, all the suns which have thus
suffered lie within a particular region of the heavens,--viz., in the
Milky Way, and in that half of the Milky Way which is most irregular,
one may almost say _ragged_, in structure. (With one exception--the star
in the Northern Crown, which, nevertheless, lies on a faint outlying
streamer of the Milky Way not discernible to ordinary vision.) If then
our sun belongs to this region of space, the danger for him and for us
is somewhat greater than my previous argument would indicate. For, in
that case, we must compare the number of outbursts, not with the total
number of stars within telescopic range, but with the number of those
stars which lie within this particular region of space. On the other
hand, if our sun does not lie within that region of space, the danger
for him and for us is very much less; for instead of a certain small
number of accidents among his fellow suns, there have been no such
accidents, only accidents affecting other suns which must be differently
classed.

The case may be compared to the estimation of the dangers, let us say,
of travelling by ocean steamships on a particular route. If we take the
total number of accidents, for instance, to steamships travelling
between England and the United States, we should estimate the risk of
the journey as very small, the number of passengers who have lost their
lives being very small compared with the number who have made the
journey. But even this small risk is diminished if we estimate the
danger for a passenger by Cunard steamships, simply because no passenger
has yet lost his life through accident to one of these Cunard vessels.

So in the case of our sun, the danger of an outburst such as has
affected the stars in the Northern Crown and Cygnus is small enough when
we estimate it by comparing the number of such accidents with the total
number of stars, but vanishes almost into nothingness when we note that
no insulated star like our sun seems hitherto to have undergone one of
these tremendous catastrophes.

But as regards the fate of worlds circling round suns which have
suffered in this way, we can form but one opinion. Beyond all doubt, if
such worlds existed and were inhabited when their central orb blazed
forth with many hundred times its former lustre, all life must have
perished from their surface. We may believe, as many do, that no
conditions are too unlike those we are familiar with on earth to render
life impossible; that the creatures subsisting in a world exposed to the
most fiery heat or to the most intense cold are adapted as perfectly to
the conditions under which they subsist as we are to the circumstances
of terrestrial life. But even adopting this view, though it seems to
accord ill with what we know of our own earth,--where life ceases
towards the polar and over large tracts of the equatorial regions,--we
could not believe that creatures thus adapted to the conditions
prevailing around them could endure an entire change of those
conditions. With the accessions of heat in the stars in Cygnus and the
Crown, such change must inevitably have taken place. Therefore, as I
think, we must regard the catastrophes affecting those remote suns as
assuredly involving "The End of many Worlds."

    _Note._--What is stated in the latter portion of this chapter
    applies now only to the star in the Northern Crown; for the star in
    Cygnus has not faded into a small star, but into a small nebula! For
    the further history of this star, the reader is referred to my
    forthcoming treatise entitled, "Pleasant Ways in Science."

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Its place is indicated in my School Atlas, as well as (of course) in
my Library Atlas, from the latter of which the small maps illustrating
the present article have been pricked off. The new star is marked T in
the Crown (Map VIII.), and must not be confounded with the star τ,
as in Roscoe's Treatise on Spectral Analysis, and in some astronomical
works. The star τ is a well known fifth magnitude star, which has
shone with no perceptible increase or diminution of splendour since
Bayer's time certainly, and probably for thousands of years before.

[8] This chapter was first published in February, 1877, when the star
was already invisible to the naked eye.

[9] It will be remembered by those familiar with the history of solar
observation, that when the spectrum of the solar prominence was first
observed, the orange-yellow bright line was supposed to be the
well-known double sodium line. It is so near to this pair of lines, that
while they are called D 1 and D 2, it has been called D 3; and in a
spectroscope of small dispersive power the three would be seen as one.




[Illustration]




VI.

_THE AURORA BOREALIS._


Among the objects in view, when the recent Polar expedition was fitted
out, was the hope that during the winter of 1875-76 the scientific
observers who accompanied the expedition might be able to study the
Aurora Borealis under unusually favourable conditions. This hope was, as
most of my readers doubtless know, disappointed. Few auroras were seen,
and those seen were not remarkable either for brilliancy or for beauty
of colour. Yet in the very disappointment of the hope which had been
entertained on this subject there was very significant evidence
respecting the aurora, as will presently be shown. The quiescence, at
that time, of the forces which produce the auroral streamers had its
meaning, and a very strange one.

The aurora is one of those phenomena of nature which are characterized
by exceeding beauty, and sometimes by an imposing grandeur, but are
unaccompanied by any danger, and indeed, so far as can be determined, by
any influence whatever upon the conditions which affect our well-being.
Comparing the aurora with a phenomenon akin to it in
origin--lightning--we find in this respect the most marked contrast.
Both phenomena are caused by electrical discharges; both are exceedingly
beautiful. It is doubtful which is the more imposing so far as visible
effects are concerned. When the auroral crown is fully formed, and the
vault of heaven is covered with the auroral banners, waving hither and
thither silently, now fading from view, anon glowing with more intense
splendour, the mind is not less impressed with a sense of the wondrous
powers which surround us than when, as the forked lightnings leap from
the thundercloud, the whole heavens glow with violet light, and then
sink suddenly into darkness. The solemn stillness of the auroral display
is as impressive in its kind as the crashing peal of the thunderbolt.
But there is a striking contrast between the feelings with which we
regard the safe splendours of the aurora and the terrible glory of the
lightning flash. One display we contemplate with the calmness engendered
by absolute security; the other--no matter how little the fear of death
may affect the reason--cannot be regarded without exciting the
consciousness of danger. We witness in safety, so far as itself is
concerned, the flash whose light illuminates the cloud masses above and
around us, but for aught we know it may be the last we shall ever see,
since no man killed by lightning ever saw the flash which brought his
death.

I do not purpose to consider here at any length those facts respecting
the aurora which properly find their place in text-books of science, but
those only which are less commonly dealt with, and seem at once most
suggestive and most perplexing.

The reader is no doubt aware that auroras, or polar streamers, as they
are sometimes called, are appearances seen not around the true poles of
the earth, but around the magnetic poles, which lie very far away from
those geographical poles which our arctic and antarctic seamen have in
vain attempted to reach. We in England, though much nearer to the north
pole than the inhabitants of Canada, see far fewer auroras than they do,
and those we see are far less splendid, simply because we are farther
away from the northern magnetic pole. This will be seen from the
accompanying pair of maps (from my "Elementary Physical Geography"),
showing where the northern and southern magnetic poles lie. Again, you
will see from the northern map, that from England the northern magnetic
pole lies towards the west of due north. That is why when we see a fully
developed auroral arch in this country its crown lies towards the west
of north (almost midway between north and north-west). I may have
occasion at another time to consider the curious changes which affect
the actual position of the magnetic poles and lines; in this place I
merely note that what is now said respecting them only refers to the
present time.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.--The Northern Magnetic Meridians and Lines of
Equal Dip.]

[Illustration: Fig. 10.--The Southern Magnetic Meridians and Lines of
Equal Dip.]

The formation of auroral streamers around the magnetic poles of the
earth shows that these lights are due to electrical discharges, just as
the general magnetic phenomena of the earth indicate the existence of
electrical currents. The earth, in fact, with its envelope of air, moist
and dense near the surface, rare and dry above may be regarded as an
enormous magnetic instrument, a core surrounded by conducting matter, in
which electrical currents pass whenever the condition of the earth's
magnetism changes. The discharges of electricity, though only visible at
night, take place in reality in the daytime also. According to their
extent and position, varying with the varying conditions under which
they take place, their aspect changes. Moreover, from different parts of
the earth the appearance of the aurora is different. From low latitudes
(I speak now of magnetic latitudes as indicated by the closed curves
around the magnetic poles in the maps), the auroral arch is seen towards
the north in our hemisphere, towards the south in the other hemisphere.
From points nearer the magnetic pole it is seen overhead, and when that
pole is approached still nearer, the crown of the arch is seen on the
side remote from the pole,--that is, towards the south in our
hemisphere, towards the north in the southern hemisphere.

Remembering that the aurora is due to electrical discharges in the upper
regions of the air, it is interesting to learn what are the appearances
presented by the aurora at places where the auroral arch is high above
the horizon,--these being, in fact, places nearly _under_ the auroral
arch. M. Ch. Martins, who observed a great number of auroras at
Spitzbergen in 1839, thus writes (as translated by Mr. Glaisher)
respecting them: "At times they are simple diffused gleams or luminous
patches; at others, quivering rays of pure white which run across the
sky, starting from the horizon as if an invisible pencil were being
drawn over the celestial vault; at times it stops in its course, the
incomplete rays do not reach the zenith, but the aurora continues at
some other point; a bouquet of rays darts forth, spreads out into a fan,
then becomes pale, and dies out. At other times long golden draperies
float above the head of the spectator, and take a thousand folds and
undulations as if agitated by the wind. They appear to be but at a
slight elevation in the atmosphere, and it seems strange that the
rustling of the folds as they double back on each other is not audible.
Generally, a luminous bow is seen in the north; a black segment
separates it from the horizon, the dark colour forming a contrast with
the pure white or bright red of the bow, which darts forth rays,
extends, becomes divided, and soon presents the appearance of a luminous
fan, which fills the northern sky, and mounts nearly to the zenith,
where the rays, uniting, form a crown, which in its turn darts forth
luminous jets in all directions. The sky then looks like a cupola of
fire; the blue, the green, the yellow, the red, and the white vibrate in
the palpitating rays of the aurora. But this brilliant spectacle lasts
only a few minutes; the crown first ceases to emit luminous jets, and
then gradually dies out; a diffused light fills the sky; here and there
a few luminous patches, resembling light clouds, open and close with
incredible rapidity, like a heart that is beating fast. They soon get
pale in their turn, everything fades away and becomes confused, the
aurora seems to be in its death-throes; the stars, which its light had
obscured, shine with a renewed brightness; and the long polar night,
sombre and profound, again assumes its sway over the icy solitudes of
earth and ocean."

The association between auroral phenomena and those of terrestrial
magnetism has long been placed beyond a doubt. Wargentin in 1750 first
established the fact, which had been previously noted, however, by
Halley and Celsius. But the extension of the relation to phenomena
occurring outside the earth--very far away from the earth--belongs to
recent times.

The first point to be noticed, as showing that the aurora depends partly
on extra-terrestrial circumstances, is the fact that the frequency of
its appearance varies greatly from time to time. It is said that the
aurora was hardly ever seen in England during the seventeenth century,
though the northern magnetic pole was then much nearer to England than
it is at present. Halley states that before the great aurora of 1716
none had been seen (or at least recorded) in England for more than
eighty years, and no remarkable aurora since 1574. In the records of the
Paris Academy of Sciences no aurora is mentioned between 1666 and 1716.
At Berlin one was recorded in 1707 as a very unusual phenomenon; and the
one seen at Bologna in 1723 was described as the first which had ever
been seen there. Celsius, who described in 1733 no less than three
hundred and sixteen observations of the aurora in Sweden between 1706
and 1732, states that the oldest inhabitants of Upsala considered the
phenomenon as a great rarity before 1716. Anderson, of Hamburg, states
that in Iceland the frequent occurrence of auroras between 1716 and 1732
was regarded with great astonishment. In the sixteenth century, however,
they had been frequent.

Here, then, we seem to find the evidence of some cause external to the
earth, as producing auroras, or at least as tending to make their
occurrence more or less frequent. The earth has remained to all
appearance unchanged in general respects during the last three
centuries, yet in the sixteenth her magnetic poles have been frequently
surrounded by auroral streamers; during the seventeenth these streamers
have been seldom seen; during the last two-thirds of the seventeenth
century auroras have again been frequent; and during the present century
they have occurred sometimes frequently during several years in
succession, at others very seldom.

Let us inquire a little more closely into the circumstances attending
auroral displays, in order to ascertain what external cause it is which
thus influences their occurrence.

Connected as auroras are with the phenomena of terrestrial magnetism,
we may expect to find some help in our inquiry from the study of these
phenomena.

Now it appears certain that magnetic phenomena are partly influenced by
changes in the sun's condition. We may well believe that they are in the
main due to the sun's ordinary action, but the peculiarities which
affect them seem to depend on _changes_ in the sun's action. It is found
that the daily oscillation of the magnetic needle corresponds with the
diurnal change in the position of the sun owing to the earth's rotation.
An annual change affecting that oscillation depends on the varying
distance of the sun as the year proceeds. The daily change is not only
greater than the annual, but is characterized by irregularities, when
the face of the sun shows the greatest number of spots. It was found by
General Sabine, says Mr. Balfour Stewart, "that the aggregate value of
magnetic disturbances at Toronto attained a maximum in 1848, nor was he
slow to remark that this was also Schwabe's period of maximum sun-spots.
It was afterwards found, by observations made at Kew, that 1859 (another
of Schwabe's years) was also a year of maximum magnetic disturbance....
There is also some reason to believe that on one occasion our luminary
was caught in the very act. On the first of September, 1869, two
astronomers, Carrington and Hodgson, were independently observing the
sun's disc, which exhibited at that time a very large spot, when, about
a quarter past eleven, they noticed a very bright star of light suddenly
break out over the spot and move with great velocity across the sun's
surface. On Mr. Carrington sending afterwards to Kew Observatory, at
which place the position of the magnet is recorded continuously by
photography, it was found that a magnetic disturbance had broken out at
the very moment when this singular appearance had been observed." The
dip of the magnetic needle, its deflection from the north, the
inferiority of its directive force, were all three simultaneously and
abruptly altered, and continued so for many hours.

Nor are we left in any doubt as to the connection between such
well-marked disturbances of the magnetic needle. While the needle was
thus violently displaced, vivid auroras occurred over the greater part
of both the northern and southern (magnetic) hemispheres. They were seen
in latitudes where usually auroras are as infrequent as rain in
Peru,--at Rome, in the West Indies, even within eighteen degrees of the
equator.

The disturbance of the earth's electrical condition was well shown in
other ways. Mr. C. V. Walker, the telegraphist, found that strong
electrical currents affected the various telegraphic lines throughout
England. These currents changed in direction every two or three minutes.
In many places it was impossible to send telegraphic messages. In
America some of the signalmen received severe electric shocks. "At a
station in Norway," says Sir J. Herschel, "the telegraphic apparatus was
set fire to; and at Boston, in North America, a flame of fire followed
the pen of Bain's electric telegraph (which writes down the message upon
chemically prepared paper)."

Many of my readers will doubtless remember the auroras of May 13, 1869,
and October 24, 1870, both of which occurred when the sun's surface was
marked by many spots, and both of which were accompanied by remarkable
disturbance of the earth's magnetism.

It may, then, fairly be assumed that the occurrence of auroras depends
in some way, directly or indirectly, on the condition of the sun. But
what the real nature of that connection may be is not to be easily
determined. It is clear that the eleven-year-period of sun-spots is not
the only, or even the chief period affecting auroras, for we have seen
that sometimes for a full century, or even more, very few auroras are
seen. It is not by any means certain that the connection between the
sun's condition and the occurrence of auroras is of the nature of cause
and effect; quite probably sun-spots and auroras depend on some common
cause as yet undetected,--and possibly never to be detected by man.

Regarding the auroral streamers as terrestrial lights only, but in some
sense like the light reflected by planets in having their real source
in the sun, we can no longer speak, as Humboldt was wont to do, of our
planet possessing a power of emitting light of its own. Yet his manner
of dealing with auroral light still possesses interest for us,
especially in relation to the question whether these polar lights are
emitted by other planets and may possibly be discerned from our earth.
"It results from the phenomena of the aurora," said Humboldt, "that the
earth is endowed with the property of emitting a light distinct from
that of the sun. The intensity of this light is rather greater than that
of the moon in its first quarter. It is at times, as on January 7, 1831,
strong enough to admit of one's reading printed characters without
difficulty. This light of the earth, the emission of which towards the
poles is almost continuous" (this, however, is not strictly the case),
"reminds us of the light of Venus, the part of which not lighted by the
sun often glimmers with a dim phosphorescent light. Other planets may
also possess a light evolved out of their own substance."

I would venture, however, to express strong doubts as to the possibility
of discerning, either on Venus or on any other planet, the auroral
gleams which may very probably illuminate at times their nocturnal
skies. It must be remembered that the aurora, when at its brightest and
covering a large part of the sky, only gives about as much light as the
moon in her first quarter,--that is, as one half of a disc so small that
180,000 such discs would not equal the entire sky. The luminosity of the
aurora is then in reality very small; probably far less than that of the
earth's surface when illuminated by the full moon. A distant hill on
which the rays of the full moon are falling seems strongly illuminated,
and yet its light is really so faint that we could scarcely discern it
at all save for the favouring effect of contrast. We know this, because
we often see portions of the moon's surface which are illuminated by
earthshine (when we see what is called the old moon in the new moon's
arms), and these portions are quite faint by comparison with the rest of
the moon; yet earthshine exceeds moonshine at least twelve times, and
probably more nearly twenty times in splendour.

The glimmering phosphorescent light, supposed to have been seen on parts
of Venus not lighted by the moon, is a phenomenon about which
experienced telescopists are somewhat doubtful, though Webb speaks of
the appearance as remarkably well attested, quoting, amongst others, the
following cases. In 1715, Derham, in his "Astro-Theology," says that
"the sphericity or rotundity is manifest in our moon, yea, and in Venus,
too, in whose greatest falcations" (_i.e._, when they appear as
crescents) "the dark parts of their globes may be perceived, exhibiting
themselves under the appearance of a dull and rusty colour." In 1806,
the phenomenon displayed itself beautifully to Harding three times and
to Schröter once within five weeks. "Guthrie and others noticed it a few
years ago, with small reflectors, in Scotland; Purchas, at Ross, in
England; De Vico and Palomba, many times in Italy." Winnecke records a
similar observation, though very faint, 1871, September 25, a little
before noon. Van Hahn also says he saw it repeatedly, by day as well as
by night, and with several instruments; he was, however, an inferior
observer. The dark side is sometimes described as grey, sometimes as
reddish. The phenomenon has, on the other hand, been looked for
specially, on several occasions, by practised observers, using very fine
instruments, who have failed to recognise any trace of it.

One of the most remarkable observations ever made on Venus must here be
mentioned. Mädler states that on one occasion, when he was observing the
planet, he saw a number of brushes of light diverging from the circular
side (_i.e._, the outside of the planet's crescent), lasting as long as
the planet could be seen that evening, and remaining unchanged when he
changed the position of the telescopic eye-piece, or used a different
one. "He attempts no explanation," says Webb, "but thinks it could not
have been an optical illusion. This is certainly _possible_, but it is
an instructive instance of the oversights which may be incidental even
to great philosophers, that it never seems to have occurred to him to
try another telescope!" It cannot be doubted that the evidence would
have been greatly strengthened had he changed telescope as well as
eye-piece; though it is not readily to be explained how a known
telescope, frequently used as well before as after this strange
appearance was seen, could for one evening only have played so strange a
trick as Mädler's must have done, if what he saw was merely an
instrumental illusion.

However, whether we have telescopic evidence or not respecting auroral
lights surrounding the polar regions of other planets, we can have very
little doubt that some among the planets, if not all of them, resemble
our earth in this as in so many other respects. The aurora is a cosmical
phenomenon, not one peculiar to our own earth. It is not, indeed,
altogether certain that our sun himself may not be girt round by mighty
auroral streamers, and that the light of these may not constitute a
noteworthy portion of the corona of glory seen around him during the
time of total eclipse.

This view, indeed, although it has not been definitely entertained as I
have here expressed it, has been suggested by reasoning which led others
to suppose that the coloured prominences around the sun may be auroras.
Perceiving the nature of the connection between terrestrial magnetism
and auroras, Balfour Stewart reasoned that we may extend our inquiries
and ask, "If the sun's action is able to create a terrestrial aurora,
why may he not also create an aurora in his own atmosphere?" It occurred
independently to General Sabine, Prof. Challis, and himself, that the
red flames visible during a total solar eclipse "may be solar auroræ."
We now know that the solar flames are not auroræ, nor, properly
speaking, flames at all, but great masses of glowing vapour. It is not,
however, by any means so clear that the solar corona is not auroral in
its nature. The following reasoning, applied by Balfour Stewart to the
sun's prominences, applies with much greater force to the corona. After
mentioning the height (from 70,000 to 80,000) which some prominences
attain, he proceeds, "Considering the gravity of the sun, we are
naturally unwilling to suppose that there can be any considerable amount
of atmosphere at such a distance from his surface; and we are therefore
induced to seek for an explanation of these red flames amongst those
phenomena which require the smallest possible amount of atmosphere for
their manifestation. Now the experiments of Mr. Gassiot and the observed
height of the terrestrial aurora alike convince us that this meteor
will answer our requirements best. And besides this, the curved
appearance of these red flames, and their high actinic power, in virtue
of which one of them, not visible to the eye, was photographed by Mr. De
la Rue, are bonds of union between these and terrestrial auroræ."

All this and much more may be said of the solar corona. Its streamers
extend not 70,000 or 80,000 miles, but 700,000 or 800,000 miles, from
the surface of the sun, where the pressure must be far smaller than near
the summits of even the loftiest prominences. They are curved and
striated, like those of the aurora, whereas the shapes of the
prominences bear only a distant resemblance to auroral streamers. They
possess a high actinic (_i.e._, photographic) power, as is shewn by the
readiness with which, during the total eclipse of December, 1871, they
were photographed, no less than six well-defined negatives being taken
both by Col. Tennant, at Ootacamund, and by Mr. Davis, at Baikal, during
the brief continuance (only a few minutes) of total obscuration. In
every respect the solar corona accords far better than do the solar
coloured prominences with the appearance we should expect to recognise
in solar auroras.

In particular, it has always seemed to me that the curved, especially
the doubly curved, streamers of the corona can only be well explained
by regarding the corona as in the main an auroral phenomenon. If mighty
currents prevailed in the higher regions of a rare atmosphere, extending
hundreds of thousands of miles from the sun's surface, appearances such
as these curved streamers would undoubtedly be explained. But no one who
considers the effect of the sun's tremendous attractive power on such an
atmosphere can fail to perceive that, according to the known laws
connecting gaseous pressure and density, the density of that atmosphere
would be enormously great, even at a very great distance from the sun's
surface, if the curved streamers really were caused by atmospheric
currents. We know, on the contrary, from the behaviour of comets which
have passed very near to the sun, that the atmosphere above his visible
surface must be very rare indeed.

It must not be understood, however, that I regard the corona as simply a
great solar aurora. It is certain that the whole region filled by the
corona is occupied by immense numbers of scattered meteors, and
extremely probable that large quantities of cometic matter exist within
the same region. Vaporous masses may also be there, circling
independently around the sun. But that this region is illuminated
constantly by auroral light, varying greatly in intensity and position,
seems very strongly indicated by all that we know about the corona, as
seen during different total eclipses of the sun.

If we so viewed the solar corona, and found our earth, therefore, in
this respect resembling the great central orb of the solar system, we
could not but regard as extremely probable the theory that other planets
also resemble the central body in this respect. We might then picture to
ourselves every orb in the solar system carrying onward its faintly
luminous crowns of boreal and austral light, not shining with constant
lustre, or in the same constant position, but at one time leaping in
coloured steamers to a great distance from the body they adorned, and
anon sinking down and growing fainter and fainter, or occasionally
disappearing altogether. Then, when some great disturbance affected the
central sun, and caused _his_ auroral banners to shine out more
brilliantly and to attain a greater extension, suddenly the auroral
streamers of all the planets would leap out into new light and life,
playing around the northern and southern magnetic poles of those orbs,
even as electric brushes play around the positive and negative
electrodes of a Geissler's tube. "Suddenly" at least so far as each
planet is concerned, but not suddenly throughout the whole system. For
the magnetic influences, like the light and heat of the sun, require
time for their transmission. Yet, so rapidly do they travel that, in a
few hours, the auroral illumination would extend from the central sun to
the outermost limits of his system.

It remains that I should make a few remarks on the evidence which that
wonderful instrument of research, the spectroscope, has afforded
respecting the light of the aurora.

Angström was the first to observe the spectrum of the aurora borealis.
He found that the greater part of the auroral light, as observed in
1867, was of one colour, yellow, but three faint bands of green and
greenish blue colour were also seen. The aurora of April 15, 1869, was
seen under very favourable conditions in America. Prof. Winlock,
observing it at New York, found its spectrum to consist of five bright
lines, of which the brightest was the yellow line just mentioned. One of
the others seems to agree very nearly, if not exactly, in position with
a green line, which is the most conspicuous feature of the spectrum of
the solar corona. During the aurora of October 6, 1869, Flögel noticed
the strong yellow line and a faint green band. Schmidt, on April 5,
1870, made a similar observation. He saw the strong yellow line, and
from it there extended towards the violet end of the spectrum a faint
greenish band, which, however, at times showed three defined lines,
fainter, than the yellow line.

It was not till the magnificent aurora of October 24, 25, 1870, that any
red lines were seen in the spectrum of an aurora. On that occasion the
background of auroral light was ruddy, and on the ruddy background there
were seen three deep red streamers very well defined. The ruddy
streamers, on the night of October 25, converged towards the auroral
crown, which was on that occasion singularly well seen. Förster of
Berlin failed to see any red line or band despite the marked ruddiness
of the auroral light. But Capron at Guildford saw a faint line in the
red part of the spectrum; and Elger at Bedford observed a red band in
the light of the red streamers, the band disappearing, however, when the
spectroscope was directed on the white rays of the aurora.

As yet the auroral spectrum has not been interpreted. It is not a
spectrum which can be (at present) artificially produced. We understand
the spectrum of the sun and stars, because spectra of the same order can
be produced in our laboratories. The spectra of the planets, so far as
they differ from the spectrum of reflected sunlight in showing signs of
the absorptive action of the planetary atmosphere, have been similarly
interpreted. So also the spectra of the coloured solar prominences are
understood, while those of nebulæ and comets, though not as yet
thoroughly explained, have been partly interpreted, because of their
partial agreement with the known spectra of earthly elements. But as yet
neither the spectrum of the aurora nor that of the solar corona has been
explained. The reason probably is, that the conditions under which the
light of the aurora as of the corona is formed are not such as have been
or perhaps can be attained or even approached in laboratory
experiments.




[Illustration]




VII.

_THE LUNAR HALO._


There are some phenomena of nature which suggest false ideas. For
instance, when we look at the broad expanse of ocean on a moonlit night,
and see a path of glory on its surface, directed towards the moon's
place, we seem to be assured by the sense of sight that that broad track
is illuminated while the waters all around are dark. A little
consideration, however, assures us that the impression is a false one,
that in this case seeing is not believing. The moon's rays really
illumine the whole surface which lies before us, and we fail to receive
light from other parts than the track below the moon, _not_ because they
receive no light, but because the light which they receive is not
reflected towards us. An observer, stationed a mile or two towards the
right or towards the left of our station, sees a different track of
light, while the part which seems bright to us seems dark to him.

The rainbow is another phenomenon of this deceptive kind. We seem to see
an arch of many colours suspended in the air,--and when we learn that it
is due to the presence of drops of water in the air, we are apt to infer
that where we see the red arch there are drops lit up with red light,
where the yellow, green, or violet arch, that the drops are aglow with
yellow, green, or violet light. But in reality this is not so; the same
drops which seem green to us will seem red to another observer, violet
to another, and to yet other observers will show none of the prismatic
colours, but only the dull grey colour of the cloud on which the rainbow
is seen. We have here a pretty emblem of the varied aspects which events
of the same real nature present to different persons, or according to
the different circumstances under which the same person may see them.
One shall see events in rosy tints, or with the freshness of spring
hues, or with the melancholy symbolled by the

                  deeper indigo (as when
    The heavy-skirted evening droops with frost)--

while to others the same events shall show only the ordinary tints of
common-place life.

The lunar halo is one of the phenomena thus deceptive to the view. We
see all around the moon a circle or arc of light, nearly white, though
sometimes faint tints of colour can be perceived in it, while the space
within the circle seems manifestly darker than the space outside. The
appearance of the halo as seen under favourable conditions is shown in
fig. 11, on the next page. In this country the dark space round the moon
is not generally so well seen as in countries where the air is clearer.
But this is in reality the characteristic feature of the halo, as its
name shows. For the name is derived from a Greek word signifying
threshing-floor (the old threshing-floors being round), and thus
naturally describes a round space relatively clear, surrounded on all
sides by a ring of aggregated matter.

We seem in looking at the lunar halo, then, to see the moon at the
centre of a dark space, surrounded by a ring of bright particles,
outside which again are particles not quite so brightly illuminated as
those forming the ring, but more brightly than those within the ring.

But in reality this impression, which, so far as the sense of sight is
concerned, seems _forced_ upon the mind, is entirely erroneous. There is
no real distinction between the space which looks dark all round the
moon, the space beyond which does not look dark, and the ring between
the two spaces which looks bright. These are all equally illuminated by
the moon, in the same sense, at least, that we say the surface of a
moonlit sea is all equally illuminated, neglecting slight differences
which do not concern the point we are specially dealing with. Precisely
as the path of light on the ocean is not a real path of illumination,
bounded on either side by dark spaces, so the ring of light round the
moon is not a real ring of light, bounded on one side by a less bright
region, and within by a dark space.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.--Lunar Halo]

Although my object in these essays is not specially to deal with
scientific matters, but rather with the thoughts (much more important in
my belief) which they suggest--so that, in dealing with my present
subject, I wish rather to call attention to the manifold ways in which
our senses may deceive us unless their evidence is carefully
cross-examined--yet it may be worth while to notice how the particular
illusion here considered has deceived even the scientific elect.

It had been noticed by Tyndall, in certain experiments, that a very
sensitive measurer of heat, when placed under the moon's rays, gathered
together by a powerful condenser, seemed to indicate cooling rather than
heating, as we should expect. On this a French student of science
pointed to the darkening under the moon where the lunar halo is seen as
evidence that our satellite possesses a certain power of clearing away
vaporous matter from the air. "_On peut dire_," he said, speaking of the
dark space within the halo, "_que la lune ouvre alors une porte par
laquelle s'échappe le calorique que l'action solaire a emmagasiné dans
les couches inférieures_." "One may say," that is, "that the moon then
opens a door through which the heat escapes, which the sun's action has
stored up in the lower layers" (of the air). It will be manifest, if we
remember that a lunar halo can often be seen at the same time from
stations hundreds of miles apart, that there can be no such opening of
clear air. For the cloud layer in which the halo is formed is but a few
miles above the observer; and therefore, if one observer saw a circular
opening in this layer, with the moon at its centre, another, a hundred
miles from him, would see the space in a very different direction. The
moon would not only not be at the centre of the space for this second
observer, but would not be visible through the space at all. Moreover,
the space could not possibly seem round to both observers; if it seemed
round to one, it would look like a very flat oval of darkness (almost a
mere line) to the other.

The real explanation of the lunar halo is very different. When you see
such a halo, you may be certain that there is, high up in the air, a
layer of light feathery cloud--the cirrus cloud, as it is
called--composed of tiny crystals of ice. These crystals, as we know
from those which in winter sometimes fall (not as snow, but as little
ice-stars), have all a definite shape. They are in fact little prisms of
ice, with angles like those of an equilateral triangle. These little
prisms deflect the light which falls upon them, just as one of the drops
of a chandelier deflects any light which falls upon it. If you hold a
prism-drop of a chandelier between the eye and a light, you will see
that the prism looks dark; it is really lit up, but it sends the light
away in such a direction that the eye receives none. Now move it
gradually away from the line of sight to the light, and at a certain
distance it appears full of light; or, to speak more correctly, it sends
the light it receives directly towards your eye. Beyond that position it
again looks dark, but not so dark as when it was nearly between the eye
and the light.

The little crystals of ice perform the same part with respect to the
moon, when we see a lunar halo. Those between us and the moon, or within
a certain distance from the line of sight to the moon, are, in reality,
lit up by the moon's rays; but they send off those rays in such
directions that we do not receive the light. Thus, all the space lying
towards the moon, and for a certain distance all round, looks dark. But,
at a certain distance, these little crystals send us light. If we could
see them separately, they would seem to be full of light. That is the
distance where ice-crystals of their known shape act most favourably in
deflecting light,--that is, send off most for all the varying positions
(not places) they can be in. At greater distances, a small proportion
send us light. Thus, at that distance we have a ring of light, and
outside the ring we have a gradual falling off in the quantity of light.

But the reader will be apt, perhaps, to say, How can all this be proved?
No one has ever been among the ice-crystals of the feathery clouds when
they are performing this work. When Coxwell and Glaisher made their
highest ascent, the feather-clouds seemed almost as high above them as
ever. Nor, if any one could reach those clouds, could he see the
ice-crystals at their work. Yet there are few points about which science
is more certainly assured than about this explanation of the halo. For
we know the shape constantly assumed by ice-crystals; we know according
to what precise law ice bends rays of light falling upon it; hence we
can calculate quite certainly where, if ice-crystals make the halo, its
rings should be seen. And the halo has the precise position thus
calculated from the known laws of optics, and the known facts about ice
and ice-crystals. The diameter of the halo should be, and is, about
eighty times the apparent diameter of the moon, or somewhat less than
half the arc which separates the point overhead from the horizon.

There is, however, yet stronger evidence. Haloes form around the sun as
well as round the moon,--in fact, more frequently. Solar haloes have so
much more light in them that we can recognise varieties of tint. Now, it
follows from the laws of optics that, for the red part of the sun's
light, the halo ring should have a smaller diameter than the halo ring
for the violet part, intermediate colours having their corresponding
intermediate halo rings. Thus, the halo ring, as a whole, should be
rainbow-tinted, red on the inside, then orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, and violet; and these colours are shown (under favourable
conditions) in this order.

The student looking out for haloes, solar or lunar, must be careful not
to confound them with solar and lunar coronas, that is, not the corona
of astronomy, but rings of light around the sun and moon, much smaller
than the true halo rings. What I have said above about the size of the
true halo will suffice to prevent such a mistake. Coronas are not nearly
so _easily_, though they have been quite as thoroughly, explained by
science, as haloes.

It is singular to observe how utterly unlike the interpretation of the
halo by science is from the natural interpretation. The observer would
say, There surely is a dark space all round the moon, and round that a
ring of light,--I see these things, and seeing is believing. Science
says there is no dark space, and there is no ring of light; while the
eye of science perceives something where the lunar halo shines which
ordinary vision cannot recognise. Up yonder, many miles above the earth,
science sees millions of crystals of ice, carried hither and thither--so
light are they--by every movement of the air. Science sees these ice
crystals deflecting the rays of moonlight, sifting the red rays from the
orange, and these from the yellow, yellow from green, green from blue,
blue from indigo, and indigo from violet. Science, in fine, perceives
processes taking place in those higher regions of air compared with
which the most delicate analyses of the laboratory are utterly coarse
and imperfect.

There is a purer and nobler poetry in the lunar halo as thus understood
than in its mere visible phenomena, attractive and beautiful though
these are. Idle indeed is the fear that the interpretation of this
special mystery of nature will leave the number of nature's mysteries
diminished by one. On the contrary, for the one mystery explained many
deeper mysteries are suggested. The phenomena discernible by the sense
of sight are explained, but only by bringing into the range of a purer
and more piercing vision phenomena infinitely more wonderful. If one
could see through some amazing extension of visual power, or if even the
imagination could adequately picture, the rush of light waves of all
orders of length upon the line of crystal breakers, their deflection in
all directions, their separation into their various orders of
wave-length; if one could perceive the actual illumination of the
ice-crystals, even where they seem dark to us, and the continual
fluctuations of the troubled sea of ether between the crystal breakers
and the earth below,--the scene would infinitely transcend in interest
and mystery, the picture would be infinitely more suggestive of solemn
thoughts, than the scene--beautiful though it doubtless is--presented
by the halo-girt moon to ordinary vision. Truly they know little of the
real meaning of science who regard it as depriving natural phenomena of
their effect on the imagination, as robbing Nature of her poetic
influence.




[Illustration]




VIII.

_MOONLIGHT._


The light of the moon and the changes of the moon were probably the
first phenomena which led men to study the motions of the heavenly
bodies. In our times, when most men live where artificial illumination
is used at night, we can scarcely appreciate the full value of moonlight
to men who cannot obtain artificial light. Especially must moonlight
have been valuable to the class of men among whom, according to all
traditions, the first astronomers appeared. The tiller of the soil might
fare tolerably well without nocturnal light, though even he,--as indeed
the familiar designation of the harvest-moon shows us,--finds special
value, sometimes, in moonlight. But to the shepherd moonlight and its
changes must have been of extreme importance as he watched his herds and
flocks by night. We can understand how carefully he would note the
change from the new moon to the time when throughout the whole night, or
at least of the darkest hours, the full moon illuminated the hills and
valleys over which his watch extended, and thence to the time when the
sickle of the fast waning moon shone but for a short time before the
rising of the sun. To him, naturally, the lunar month, and its
subdivision, the week, would be the chief measure of time. He would
observe--or rather he could not help observing--the passage of the moon
around the zodiacal band, some twenty moon-breadths wide, which is the
lunar roadway among the stars. These would be the first purely
astronomical observations made by man; so that we learn without surprise
that before the present division of the zodiac was adopted the old
Chaldean astronomers (as well as the Indian, Persian, Egyptian, and
Chinese astronomers, who still follow the practice) divided the zodiac
into 28 lunar mansions, each mansion corresponding nearly to one day's
motion of the moon among the stars.

It is easy to understand how the first rough observations of moonlight
and its changes taught men the true nature of the moon, as an opaque
globe circling round the earth, and borrowing her light from the sun.
They perceived, first, that the moon was only full when she was opposite
the sun, shining at her highest in the south at midnight when the sun
was at his lowest beneath the northern horizon. Before the time of full
moon, they saw that more or less of the moon's disc was illuminated as
he was nearer or farther from the position opposite the sun, the
illuminated side being towards the west--that is, towards the sun; while
after full moon the same law was perceived in the amount of light, the
illuminated side being still towards the sun, that is, towards the east.
They could not fail to observe the horned moon sometimes in the daytime,
with her horns turned directly from the sun, and showing as plainly, by
her aspect, whence her light was derived, as does any terrestrial ball
lit up either by a lamp or by the sun.

The explanation they gave was the explanation still given by
astronomers. Let us briefly consider it. In doing so I propose to modify
the ordinary text-book illustration which has always seemed to me
ingeniously calculated (with its double set of diversely illuminated
moons around the earth) to make a simple subject obscure.

In fig. 12, let E represent the earth one half in darkness, the other
half illuminated by the rays of the sun S, which should be supposed
placed at a much greater distance to the left,--in fact, about five
yards away from E. To preserve the right proportions, also, the sun
ought to be much smaller and the earth a mere point. I mention this to
prevent the reader from adopting erroneous ideas as to the size of these
bodies. In reality it is quite impossible to show in such figures the
true proportions of the heavenly bodies and of their distances. Next let
M_{1}, M_{2}, M_{3}, etc., represent the moon in different positions
along her circuit around the earth at E.

[Illustration: Fig. 12.--Explaining the Moon's changes.]

[Illustration: Fig. 13.--Illustrating the Moon's changes.]

Now, it is clear that when the moon is at M_{1}, her illuminated face is
turned from the earth, E. She therefore cannot be seen; and accordingly,
in fig. 12, she is presented as a black disc at 1 to correspond with her
invisibility when she is as at M_{1}. She passes on to M_{2}; and now
from E a part of her illuminated half can be seen towards the sun, which
would be towards the right, if we imagine an eye at E looking towards
M_{2}. Her appearance then is as shown at 2, fig. 13. In any
intermediate portion between M_{1} and M_{2}, the sickle of light is
visible but narrower. We see also that all this time the moon's place on
the sky cannot be far from the sun's place, for the line from E to M_{2}
is not greatly inclined to the line from E to S. When the moon has got
round to M_{3}, the observer on the earth sees as much of the dark half
as of the bright half of the moon, the bright half being seen, of
course, towards the sun. Thus the moon appears as at 3, fig. 13, Again
as to position, the moon is now a quarter of a circuit of the heavens
from the sun, for the line from E to M_{3} is square to the line from E
to S. We see similarly that when at M_{4} the moon appears as shown at
4, fig. 13, for now the observer at E sees as small a part of the moon's
dark side as he had seen of her bright side when she was at M_{2}. When
she is at M_{5} the observer at E sees her bright face only, the dark
face being turned directly from him. She, therefore, appears as at 5,
fig. 13. Also being now exactly opposite the sun, as we see from fig.
12, she is at her highest when the sun is at his lowest, or at midnight;
and at this time she rules the night as the sun rules the day.[10] As
the moon passes on to M_{6}, a portion of her dark half comes into view,
the bright side being now towards the left, as we look at M_{5} from E,
fig. 12. Her appearance, therefore, is as shown at 5. When at M_{7} she
is seen as at 7, half-bright and half-dark, as when she was at M_{3},
but the halves interchanged. At M_{8} she appears as at 8, and, lastly,
at M_{1} she is again undiscernible.

The ancient Chaldean astronomers could have little doubt as to the
validity of this explanation. In fact, while it is the explanation
obviously suggested by observed facts, one cannot see how any other
could have occurred to them.

But if they had had any doubts for a while, the occurrence of eclipses
would soon have removed those doubts. They must early have noticed that
at times the full moon became first partly obscured, then either wholly
disappeared or changed in colour to a deep coppery red, and after a
while reappeared. Sometimes the darkening was less complete, so that at
the time of greatest darkness a portion of the moon seemed eaten out,
though not by a well defined or black shadow. These phenomena, they
would find, occurred only at the time of full moon. And if they were
closely observant, they would find that these eclipses of the moon only
occurred when the full moon was on or near the great circle round the
stellar heavens, which they had learned to be the sun's track. They
could hardly fail to infer that these darkenings of the moon were caused
by the earth's shadow, near which the moon must always pass when she is
full, and through which she must sometimes pass more or less fully; in
fact, whenever, at the time of full, she is on or near the plane in
which the earth travels round the sun. Solar eclipses would probably be
observed later. For though a total eclipse of the sun is a much more
striking phenomenon than a total eclipse of the moon, yet the latter
are far more common. A partial eclipse of the sun may readily pass
unnoticed, unless the sun's rays are so mitigated by haze or mist that
it is possible to look at his disc without pain. Whenever solar eclipses
came to be noted, and we know from the Chaldean discovery of the great
eclipse period, called the _Saros_, that they were observed at least two
thousand years before the Christian era, the fact that the moon is an
opaque body circling round the earth, and much nearer to the earth than
the sun is, must be regarded as demonstrated. Not only would eclipses of
the sun be observed to occur only when the moon was passing between the
earth and the sun, but in an eclipse of the sun, whether total or
partial, the round black body cutting off the sun's light wholly or
partially would be seen to have the familiar dimensions of the lunar
orb.

Leaving solar and lunar eclipses for description on another occasion, I
will now proceed to consider a peculiarity of moonlight which must very
early have attracted attention,--I mean the phenomenon called the
harvest-moon.

The moon circuits the heavens in a path but slightly inclined to that of
the sun, called the ecliptic, and for our present purpose we may speak
of the moon as travelling in the ecliptic. Now we know that during the
winter half of the year the sun is south of the equator, the circle of
the heavenly sphere which passes through the east and west points of the
horizon, and has its plane square to the polar axis of the heavens.
During the other or summer half of the year he is north of the equator.
In the former case the sun is above the horizon less than half the
twenty-four hours, day being so much shorter as the sun is farther south
of the equator; whereas in the latter case the sun is above the horizon
more than twelve hours, day being so much the longer as the sun is
farther north of the equator. Precisely similar changes affect the moon,
only, instead of taking place in a year (the time in which the sun
circuits the stellar heavens), they occur in what is called a sidereal
month, the time in which the moon completes her circuit of the stellar
heavens. For about a fortnight the moon is above the horizon longer than
she is below the horizon, while during the next fortnight she is below
the horizon longer than she is above the horizon. Now clearly when the
length of what we may call the moon's diurnal path (meaning her path
above the horizon) is lengthening most, the time of her rising on
successive nights must change least. She comes to the south later and
later each successive night by about 50½ minutes, because she is always
travelling towards the east at such a rate as to complete one circuit in
about four weeks; and losing thus one day in 28, she losses about 50½
minutes per day. If the interval between her rising and her arriving to
the south were always the same, she would rise 50½ minutes later night
after night. But if the interval is lengthening, say by 10 minutes per
night, she would of course rise only 40½ minutes later: if the interval
_is_ lengthening 20 minutes per night, she would rise only 30½ minutes
later, and so forth. But the lunar diurnal arc is lengthening all the
time she is passing from her position farthest south of the equator to
her position farthest north, just in the same way as the solar day is
lengthening from mid-winter to midsummer, only to a much greater degree.
And as the solar day lengthens fastest at spring when the sun crosses
the equator from south to north, so the time the moon is above the
horizon lengthens most, day by day, when the moon is crossing the
equator from south to north. It lengthens, _then_, from an hour to an
hour and 20 minutes in one day, that is, the interval between moon-rise
and moon-setting increases from 30 to 40 minutes. At this time, then,
whenever it happens in each lunar month, the moon's time of rising
changes least: instead of the moon rising night after night 50½ minutes
later, the actual difference varies only from 10 to 20 minutes.

Now if this happens at a time when the moon is not nearly full, it is
not specially noticed, because the moon's light is not then specially
useful. But if it happens when the moon is nearly full, it is noticed,
because her light is then so useful. A moon nearly full, afterwards
quite full, and then for a day or two still nearly full, rising night
after night at nearly the same time, remaining also night after night
longer above the horizon, manifestly serves man for the time being in
the most convenient way possible. But it is clear that as the full moon
is opposite the sun, and as to fulfil the condition described we have
seen that she must be crossing the equator from south to north, the sun,
opposite to her, must be at the part of his path where he crosses the
equator from north to south. In other words, the time of year must be
the autumnal equinox. Thus the moon which comes to "full" nearest to
September 22 or 23 will behave in the convenient way described. At this
time, moreover, when she rises night after night nearly at the same
time, the nights are lengthening fastest while the time the moon is
above the horizon is lengthening still more, and therefore, in all
respects, the moon is then doing her best, so to speak, to illuminate
the nights. At this season the moon is called the harvest-moon, from the
assistance she sometimes renders to harvesters.

The moon which is full nearest to September 22-23 may precede or follow
that date. In the former case only can it properly be called a
harvest-moon. In the latter it is sometimes called the hunter's moon.
The full moon occurring nearest to harvest time will always partake more
or less of the qualities of a full moon occurring at the autumnal
equinox: and similarly of a full moon following the autumnal equinox. So
that, in almost every year, there may be said to be a harvest-moon and a
hunter's moon. But, of course, it will very often happen that in any
particular agricultural district the harvest has to be gathered in
during the wrong half of the lunar month, that is, during the last and
first, instead of the second and third quarters.

The reader must not fall into the mistake of supposing, as I have seen
sometimes stated in text-books of astronomy, that we are more favoured
in this respect than the inhabitants of the southern hemisphere. It is
quite true that the same full moon shines on us as on our friends in New
Zealand, Australia, and Cape Colony, and also that our autumn is their
spring, and their spring our autumn. But the full moon we have in autumn
behaves in the southern hemisphere not as with us, but as our spring
full moon behaves; and the full moon of our spring, which is their
autumn, behaves with them as our autumn moon behaves with us. It is,
therefore, for them a harvest-moon if it occur before the equinox, and a
hunter's moon if it occur after the equinox. A very little consideration
will show why this is. In fact if, in the explanation given above, the
words north and south be interchanged, and March 21-22 written for
September 22-23, the explanation will be precisely that which I should
have given respecting the harvest (or March) moon of the southern
hemisphere, if I had been writing for southern readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having thus considered the moon as a light-giver, both in respect of her
monthly changes and of that yearly change which causes her services to
be most useful in harvest time, let us consider what science tells us of
the orb which thus usefully reflects to us the solar rays.

The moon is a globe about 2159½ miles in diameter, travelling round the
earth at a mean distance of 238,818 miles. Her path round the earth is
not, however, a circle, but an ellipse, which itself is constantly
varying in shape. The average eccentricity of the moon's path is such
that her greatest and least distances, as she circuits round it, are
251,953 miles and 225,683 miles respectively; but when it is most
eccentric, her greatest and least distances are 252,948 miles and
221,593 miles respectively; while, when it is least eccentric, they are
respectively 250,324 miles and 227,312 miles. The earth's surface
exceeds the moon's nearly 13½ times, the actual number of square miles
in the moon's surface amounting to 14,600,000. This is nearly equal to
Europe and Africa together, or, more nearly still, to North and South
America together, without their islands. In volume our earth exceeds the
moon rather more than 49¼ times: or, more nearly, if the earth's volume
be represented by 10,000, the moon's will be represented by 209. The
materials of the moon's globe are either lighter or (more probably) they
are less closely compacted than those forming our earth,--for, according
to the best modern estimates, the earth exceeds the moon in mass nearly
81½ times. Assuming as the most probable value of the earth's mean
density about 5-7/10 times the density of water, the moon's mean density
is equal to 3-46/100 times that of water. Gravity at her surface is
accordingly much less than at the surface of the earth; a quantity of
matter weighing six pounds at the surface of the earth would weigh
almost exactly one pound at the surface of the moon.

The moon circuits once round the earth in 27d. 7h. 43m. 11.5s. This is
the time in which, viewed from the earth, she seems to complete one
circuit round the stellar heavens, and is therefore called a sidereal
month. But as the earth is all the time travelling the same way round
the sun, the lunar month is longer. Thus, suppose S (fig. 14) to be the
sun, E the earth at the beginning of a lunar month, M_{1} M_{2} M_{3}
M_{4} the moon's path, and M_{1} the moon's place on the line joining E
and S. If the earth remained at rest while the moon went round the path
M_{1} M_{3}, then after completing one circuit the moon would again be
at M_{1} on the line joining E and S, or it would be new moon again. But
the earth is moving onwards along the arc EE´ of her circuit round the
sun. So that when the moon has completed one circuit she is at M_{4}
(E´m_{1} drawn parallel to EM_{1}) and has still to travel some distance
before she gets round to M´ on the line joining S and E´. The lunation,
or interval between successive new moons, has an average duration of
29d. 12h. 44m. 38s., exceeding a sidereal month by 2d. 5h.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.--Explaining the difference between a sidereal
lunar month and a common lunar month or lunation.]

It would not, however, be correct to regard the earth as the true
centre of the moon's motion. The moon is in reality a planet circling
round the sun, but largely perturbed by the attraction of its companion
planet the earth. If the moon's path in the course of a year were
carefully drawn to scale, or, better, were modelled by means of a fine
wire, it would scarcely be distinguishable from a similar picture or
model of the earth's path round the sun. Or thus, the entire width of
the moon's track is about 477,636 miles, while the diameter of the orbit
along which she and the earth both travel is nearly 104,000,000 miles,
or 385 times as great. If we draw then a circle 3-85/100 inches in
diameter to represent the earth's path round the sun, somewhat
eccentrically placed, and the circular line is 1-100th of an inch wide,
the moon's track would be fairly represented by a curve touching
alternately the inside and the outside edge of this circular line, at
equidistant points dividing the circle into about 24¾ parts.

Regarding the moon as a planet, she may be said to have a year, and
seasons, and day and night, as the earth has, but very unlike our
seasons and days. Her axis is inclined only 1½ degrees from uprightness
to her path, whereas our earth's axis is inclined 23½ degrees. The sun's
range of mid-day altitude is in fact not quite equal to the range of our
sun in mid-day height, from four days before to four days after either
spring or autumn. The lunar day lasts a lunar month, daytime and
night-time each lasting rather more than a fortnight. The lunar year of
seasons is not, as is commonly stated, the same in length as ours. She
goes round the sun in the same time, so that her sidereal year is the
same as ours; but owing to the swaying round of her axis her year of
seasons or tropical year is shorter. Our tropical year is also shorter
than the sidereal year, but very little shorter, because the earth's
axis sways round once only in 25,868 years. The moon's axis sways round
once in 18⅗ years, and accordingly the year of seasons is much more
effectively shortened. It lasts, in fact, only 346d. 14h. 34m. of our
time; and contains only 11¾ lunar days. So that I cannot altogether
agree with Sir W. Herschel's statement, that "the moon's situation with
respect to the sun is much like that of our earth, and by a rotation on
its axis it enjoys an agreeable variety of seasons, and of day and
night."

When the moon is examined with a telescope her surface is seen to be
marked by many irregularities. There are large dark regions which were
formerly thought to be seas, but are now known to be land-surfaces. Some
of these regions are singularly level, and have been thought to be old
sea-bottoms. Mountains and mountain ranges are another important
feature of the moon's surface. Some, like our Rocky Mountains and
Andes, form long continuous chains; others form elevated plateaus whence
ridges extend in various directions. A very striking form is that of
narrow ridges little raised above the general level, but reaching over
enormous areas of the moon's globe. It is a system of this kind,
radiating from a great lunar crater called Tycho, which gives to small
photographs of the moon the appearance of a peeled orange. They are
supposed to indicate the action of tremendous forces of upheaval, in
past ages, bursting open portions of the moon's crust.

But the most characteristic of all the lunar features are the crater
mountains, which exist on a scale not only much larger relatively to the
moon's globe than the scale on which terrestrial craters are formed, but
much larger absolutely. They are also far more numerous. Some parts of
the moon's surface, especially in the bright south-western quarter of
her face, are literally crowded with craters of various dimensions.

There are few signs of the former emission of lava from the lunar
craters. Within some of them recent changes have been suspected. A
remarkable instance is that of the crater Linné, marked in Mädler's map
as a deep, well-walled crater, some four miles in diameter. At present
only a small crater can be seen in its place. The surrounding region is
rather conspicuously bright. It is not necessary to infer that there
has been any volcanic disturbance, however. Far more probably the walls
have been thrown down through the long-continued action of that
alternate expansion and contraction, which must affect the moon's crust
as the long fortnightly day proceeds, and then the equally long lunar
night.

There are many well-marked valleys on the moon, besides clefts and
ravines. The features called _rilles_ are among the most perplexing
objects on the moon's surface. Webb, in his charming and most useful
little book, "Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes," thus describes
them: "These most singular furrows pass chiefly through levels,
intersect craters (proving a more recent date), reappear beyond
obstructing mountains, as though carried through by a tunnel, and
commence and terminate with little reference to any conspicuous feature
of the neighbourhood. The idea of artificial formation is negatived by
their magnitude; they have been more probably referred to cracks in a
shrinking surface." Some observations would seem to show that they have
been formed from rows of closely-adjacent small craters. _Faults_, also,
or closed cracks where the surface is higher on one side than on the
other, have been recognised from the careful study of the shadows on the
moon's disc.

From measurements of the shadows of lunar mountains, it appears that
their average height is about five miles. In comparing this elevation
with that assigned to terrestrial mountains, it must be remembered that
these are measured from the sea-level; if the average height of
terrestrial mountains were determined with reference to the sea-bottom
it would be far greater. Still, even taking this circumstance into
account, the average height of the lunar mountains bears a far greater
ratio to the diameter of the globe on which they stand than the average
height of our mountains to the earth's diameter.

Several circumstances agree in showing that the moon's atmosphere must
be exceedingly rare. The shadows of lunar mountains are either actually
black or nearly so. When the moon hides the sun in total eclipse, no
sign can be seen of any refractive effort exerted on the sun's rays.
When a star is hidden (or _occulted_) by the moon, the star vanishes in
an instant and reappears with equal suddenness. It is certain from these
phenomena that the moon has either no air, or air exceedingly tenuous.
It is equally clear that she has no water, for if she had we should
undoubtedly be able to recognise the occasional formation or dissipation
of mist and vapour over parts of the moon's surface. No signs of such
phenomena have ever been observed. The moon is certainly at present a
waterless globe, so far at least as her surface is concerned.

It has been thought that though there is no water and very little air
on the side of the moon turned towards the earth, there may be both
water and air on the farther unseen side. The theory has been long since
given up, but the reasoning on which it depends is worth noting. Owing
to the strange circumstance that the moon rotates on her axis in the
same time in which she revolves round the earth, she always presents the
same face towards the earth, or very nearly so. If her axis were exactly
square to the path in which she circuits the earth, and if she revolved
at a uniform rate, we should have exactly the same side constantly
turned towards us. But as the axis is inclined about 6⅔° from
uprightness to the path round the _earth_ (which, be it remembered, is
not in the same plane as the path round the sun, but inclined 5° 8´ to
it), the northern and southern parts of the moon are alternately swayed
over by about 6⅔° into view. This apparent swaying is called a
libration, and the libration just described is called the libration in
latitude. Again, as the moon does not travel at a uniform rate round the
earth, but faster than her mean rate when nearer to us, and slower when
farther from us, she alternately gains and loses in her motion of
revolution as compared with her motion of rotation, by a quantity
varying between 5° and 7¾°, to which varying extent the parts east and
west of her mean disc are alternately swayed into view. This is called
the libration in longitude. Thus we see, beyond the edge of the _mean_
half turned towards us, a considerable fringe of the other half. If a
globe, as PAP´B, fig. 15, were divided into two halves to represent the
farther and nearer halves of the moon, and held so that that dividing
circle were seen as PEP´ in the figure, then Ppep´P´ would represent the
part brought into view at different times by the apparent swaying
described above; while P_pep´_P´ would represent the parts swayed out of
view. The regions thus alternately in view and out of view have their
greatest breadth, not at the poles or east and west, but at mMm and
m´M´m´, where the two librations act together. The narrow fringe
bordering these regions is that brought into or out of view by changes
in the place of the observer on earth, due to the earth's rotation. It
is called the parallactic fringe, any change in the apparent position of
a heavenly body, or part of one, on account of the earth's rotation,
being termed _parallax_.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.--Illustrating lunar libration.]

Lastly, let us return to the consideration of moonlight, as depending on
the condition of the moon's surface, To one who observes the moon as
seen on the sky, her light appears white; but it must not be supposed
that she is a white body. Careful estimates of the quantity of light she
reflects show that she is more nearly black than white, though in
reality she is neither one nor the other. It has been said, and truly,
that if the surface of the moon were covered with black velvet she would
still appear white; for even black velvet reflects some light, and
whatever light the moon reflected would show her by contrast with the
blackness of the sky, as a luminous body or white. It follows from the
observations made by Zöllner that if the moon's surface were covered
with white snow she could give us about 4½ times as much light as she
actually does. If she were covered with white paper she would give more
than 4 times as much light as she does. If she had a surface of white
sandstone her light would be nearly half as great again as it is. She
gives rather more light than she would if her surface consisted entirely
of weathered grey sandstone, or of clay marl, and more than twice as
much light as she would give if her surface were of moist earth, or dark
grey syenite. As some parts of her surface are obviously much brighter
than others, we must infer that some parts shine with much more, and
others with much less, brightness than weathered grey sandstone.
Probably some parts are much brighter than white sandstone, and some
much darker than dark grey syenite. From the degree in which her lustre
changes with her changing aspect, Zöllner infers that her mountains have
an average slope of about fifty-two degrees.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] It has been thought by some that, in the beginning, the moon was
always opposite the sun, thus always ruling the night. Milton thus
understood the account given in the first book of Genesis. For he
says,--

                            Less bright the morn,
    But opposite in levell'd west was set
    His mirror, with full face, borrowing her light
    From him; for other light she needed none
    In that aspect; and still that distance keeps
    Till night, then in the east her turn she shines,
    Revolv'd on Heav'n's great axle.

It was only as a consequence of Adam's transgression that he conceives
the angels sought to punish the human race by altering the movements of
the celestial bodies--

                    To the blank moon
    Her office they prescribe--

It is hardly necessary to say, perhaps, that this interpretation is not
scientifically admissible.




[Illustration]




IX.

_THE PLANET MARS._


Every one who notices the stars at all,--and who that thinks and can see
does not?--must have observed during the autumn of 1877 two bright stars
in the southern heavens. One of these shone with a lustre which but for
its ruddy hue would have caused the star to be taken for the planet
Jupiter; the other shone with a somewhat yellowish light, and was much
fainter, though surpassing most of the _fixed_ stars in brightness. The
former was the planet Mars, the latter the ringed planet Saturn. The
motions of these two stars with respect to each other and to the
neighbouring stars were sufficiently conspicuous to attract attention.
During October these stars attracted still more attention, because they
drew nearer and nearer together, to all appearance, until on November
4th they were at their nearest, when the distance separating them was
about one-third the apparent diameter of the moon, so that in a
telescope showing at one view the whole disc of the moon, Mars and
Saturn on the night of November 4th appeared like a splendid double
star, the primary a fine red orb, the companion a smaller body, but
attended by a splendid ring system and companion moons.

It was strange when we looked at these two stars, the yellow one
apparently much smaller than the brighter, and the pair seemingly close
together, to consider how thoroughly the reality differed from these
appearances. The fainter and seemingly the smaller of the two stars was
in reality some four thousand times larger than the brighter, and had,
among eight orbs attending upon it, one nearly as large as the ruddy
planet which as actually seen so completely outshone Saturn himself.
Again, instead of being near each other, those two bodies were in
reality separated by a distance exceeding some sixteen times that which
separated us from the nearer of the two.

I propose now to consider some of the more interesting characteristics
of these two planets, presenting specially those features which mark
Saturn as the representative of one family of bodies, and Mars as the
representative of another and an entirely different family.

[Illustration: Fig. 16.--The paths of Mars and Saturn during the autumn
of 1877.]

It will be well to consider Mars first; for although, as will presently
be seen, Saturn came earlier of the two to the portion of his path
where he was most favourably seen, there was nothing specially
remarkable about the approach of Saturn on that occasion, whereas Mars
in the year 1877 made a nearer approach to the earth than he has for
thirty-two years past, or will for some forty-seven years to come.

In the first place, let us note the apparent paths on which the two
planets have been and are now travelling.

Fig. 16 presents that part of the zodiac along which lay the apparent
paths of Mars and Saturn in 1877. The stars marked with Greek letters
belong to the constellation Aquarius, or the Water-Bearer (his jar is
formed by the stars in the upper right-hand corner of the
picture),--with a single exception, the star marked κ, which, with
those close to it not lettered, belongs to the constellation Pisces, or
the Fishes. Thus the loops traversed by the two planets in 1877 both
fell in the constellation of the Water-Bearer; but, as will be seen from
the symbols on the ecliptic, these loops lie in the zodiacal sign
Pisces, which begins at κ and ends at γ. The signs have long
since passed away, in fact, from the constellations to which they
originally belonged.

It will be noticed that Mars described a wide loop ranging to a
considerable distance from the ecliptic (or sun's track). Saturn, on the
other hand, travelled on a narrow and shorter loop lying much nearer to
the ecliptic, his whole track, except just where he was turning,--his
stationary points,--lying nearly parallel to the ecliptic. It may be
well to mention the reason of this well-marked difference. Mars does not
in reality range even quite so widely from the plane of the ecliptic as
Saturn does. Nay, his path is even less inclined to the ecliptic. (This
may sound like repetition, but the inclination of a planet's path to the
ecliptic is one thing, the range of the planet north and south of the
ecliptic, in miles, is another. Mercury, for example, has of all planets
the path most inclined to the ecliptic, but Mercury never attains
anything like the same distance from the plane of the ecliptic which is
attained by the remote planet Uranus, whose path is of all others the
least inclined to the plane of the ecliptic. In fact, none of the
planets, except Venus and Mars, have so small a range from the ecliptic
in actual distance as Mercury has.) The reason why the range of Mars
from the ecliptic appeared so much greater than that of Saturn, in 1877,
is similar to the reason why Mars, though much smaller than Saturn,
largely outshone him. Mars looked larger because he was nearer, his loop
looked larger because his real path was nearer. For the same reason that
a hut close by seems to stand higher above the horizon than a palace at
a distance, or a mountain yet further away, so the displacement of Mars
from the ecliptic plane appeared greater than that of Saturn, though in
reality much less.

Let us consider how the paths of these planets are really situated. I
know of no better way of showing this than by drawing the paths of the
two families of planets separately. It is in fact utterly impossible to
give an accurate yet clear view of the solar system in a single picture;
and the student may take it for granted that every drawing or plate in
which this has ever been attempted is from one cause or another
misleading.

In figs. 17 and 18 the shape and position of the planetary paths are
correctly shown. Very little description is necessary, but it may be
mentioned that on each orbit the point nearest to the sun is indicated
by the initial letter of the planet, while the point farthest from the
sun is indicated by the same letter _accented_. The places where each
path crosses the plane of the earth's--which is supposed to be the plane
of the paper--are marked ☊ and ☋, the former sign marking
where the planet in travelling round in the direction shown by the
arrows crosses the plane of the earth's path from below upwards, while
the latter marks the place where the planet in travelling round crosses
the plane of the earth's path from above downwards.

[Illustration: Fig. 17.--The paths of Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and
Mars, around the Sun.]

Fig. 17 shows the paths of the inner family of planets of which our
earth is a member. Fig. 18 shows the outer family of planets, and
inside of it the ring of small planets called asteroids. Inside that
ring, again, we see the paths of the inner family of planets; but they
appear on a very small scale indeed. In fact, the scales appended to the
two figures show that a length which represents 50,000,000 miles in fig.
17, represents 1,000,000,000 miles in fig. 18; or, in other words, the
scale of fig. 18 is only one-twentieth of the scale of fig. 17. On the
scale of fig. 17 the sun would be fairly represented by an ordinary
pin-hole; on the scale of fig. 18 the sun would be scarcely visible. The
dots round the orbits show the planets' places at intervals of 10 days
in fig. 17, and of 1000 days in fig. 18, starting always from the left
side of orbit (on horizontal line through sun).

[Illustration: Fig. 18.--The paths of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune, around the ring of small planets.]

Now looking at fig. 18 and noting how small is the distance of the path
of Mars from the earth's path, compared with the distance of Saturn's
path, we understand why Saturn, despite his far superior size, shines
far less brightly in our skies than Mars does. In fact, in October,
1877, the Earth and Mars were on the parts of their tracks which lay
nearest together, that is, the parts occupying the lower right-hand
corner of fig. 17; and turning to fig. 18, we perceive that the distance
separating the two paths here is very small indeed compared with
Saturn's distance.

So that, when we looked at Mars and Saturn as they shone in conjoined
splendour in our skies, in 1877, we saw in the bright orb of Mars the
planet whose track lies nearest to us in that direction, whereas in
looking at Saturn the range of view passed athwart the track of Mars,
through the ring of asteroids, and past the orbit of Jupiter, before
entering the wide and barren region which separates the orbits of the
two giant members of the solar system.

We study Mars under much more favourable conditions than either Jupiter
or Saturn. And yet, at a first view, the telescopic aspect of this
interesting planet is exceedingly disappointing. Galileo, who quite
easily discovered the moons of Jupiter with his largest telescope,
could barely detect with it the fact that Mars is not quite round at all
times, but is seen sometimes in the shape of the moon two or three days
before or after full. "I dare not affirm," he wrote on December 30,
1610, to his friend Castelli, "that I can observe the phases of Mars;
yet, unless I mistake, I think I already perceive that he is not
perfectly round." But even in a large telescope one can see very little
except under very favourable conditions. It has only been by long and
careful study, and piecing together the information obtained at various
times, that astronomers have obtained a knowledge of the facts which
appear in our text-books of astronomy. The possessor of a telescope who
should expect, on turning the instrument towards Mars, to perceive what
he has read in descriptions of the planet, would be considerably
disappointed.

First noticed among the features of the planet were two white spots of
light occupying the northern and southern parts of his disc. These are
now known to be regions of snow and ice, like those which surround the
poles of our own earth. But how different the reality must be from what
we seem to see in the telescope! These two tiny white specks represent
hundreds of thousands of square miles covered over with great masses of
snow and ice, which doubtless are moved by disturbing forces similar to
those which make our arctic regions for the most part impassable even
for the most daring of our seamen.

The snow-caps of Mars change in size as the planet circuits round the
sun, completing his year of seasons (which lasts 687 of our days). They
are largest in the winter of Mars, smallest in the Martian summer; so
that, as it is winter for one hemisphere when it is summer for the
other, one of the snow-caps is larger than the other at the winter and
summer seasons. In the same way, our arctic snows extend more widely
during our winter, while the antarctic snows then retreat; whereas,
during our summer, when it is winter in the southern hemisphere, the
antarctic snows advance and our arctic snows retreat.

But we have still to learn why these white spots are _known_ to be
masses of snow. They might well from analogy be considered to be snows,
since they behave like the snows of our polar regions. Yet that would be
very different from proving them to be snow masses. I shall now show how
this has been done, and afterwards describe the lands and seas of the
planet, and give a short account of the recent interesting discovery of
two moons attending on the planet which Tennyson had called the
"moonless Mars."

       *       *       *       *       *

Even before the poles of Mars had been discovered, observers had
perceived that the planet has marks upon its surface. Cassini, in 1666,
at Paris, found by observing these spots that the planet turns on its
axis once in about twenty-four hours forty minutes. In the same year Dr.
Hooke observed Mars. He was in doubt whether the planet turned once
round or twice round in about twenty-four hours; for with his imperfect
telescope two opposite faces of the planet seemed so much alike that he
was doubtful whether they really were two different faces or the same.
Fortunately he published two pictures of the planet, taken on the same
night in March, 1666, and we have been able to keep such good count of
Mars's turning on his axis, that we know exactly how many times he has
turned since that distant time. However, at present, we need not further
consider the turning motion of Mars, but rather what the telescope has
shown us about him. Only, let it be remembered that he has a day of
about twenty-four hours thirty-seven minutes, and is in this respect
much like our earth.

Maraldi, Cassini's nephew, early in the last century observed several
spots on Mars, and, in particular, one somewhat triangular dark spot,
which was one of Hooke's markings, but more clearly seen by Maraldi.
About this time it was seen that the darker markings have a somewhat
greenish colour; and towards the end of last century, or, more exactly,
about a hundred years ago, the idea was maintained by Sir W. Herschel
that the dark-greenish markings are seas, while the lighter parts of
Mars, to which the planet owes its somewhat ruddy colour, are lands. Sir
W. Herschel also was the first to show that Mars, like our earth, has
seasons. It had been supposed by Cassini, Maraldi, and others, that the
axis of Mars is upright to the level of the path in which he travels. Of
course, if this were so, the light of the sun would always fall on the
planet in the same way; for the sun is in that level. But the axis, like
that of our own earth, is bowed considerably from uprightness; so that
at one part of his year the sun's rays fall more fully on his northern
regions, and his southern regions are correspondingly turned away from
the sun; then it is summer in his northern regions, winter in his
southern. At the opposite season the reverse holds, and then winter
prevails over his northern and summer over his southern regions. Midway
between these two seasons, the sun's rays are equably distributed over
both hemispheres of Mars, and then the days and nights are equal, and it
is spring in that hemisphere which is passing from winter to summer, and
autumn in the other hemisphere which is passing from summer to winter.
All these changes are precisely like those which take place in the case
of our own earth. Only, the year of Mars, and therefore his seasons, are
longer. He takes 687 days in travelling round the sun, giving nearly
172 days, or more than five and a half of our months, for each season.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 19.      Fig. 20.      Fig. 21.

Figs. 19-21.--Three Views of Mars.]

Figs. 19, 20, and 21 are three views of Mars, drawn by Mr. Nathaniel
Green, an excellent observer, who has paid special attention to this
planet. Fig. 19 shows a faintly-marked sea running north and south (the
upper part of the picture being the south, because that is the way in
which the telescope used by astronomers inverts objects.) This is one of
the markings which deceived Hooke. This picture was drawn on May 30,
1873, at half-past seven in the evening. The second picture was drawn
two days earlier, at eight in the evening; but it shows the planet as it
would have looked on May 30 at about a quarter past nine in the evening,
by which time the sea running north and south had been carried over to
the right and lost to view. But another north and south sea had come
into view on the right. The third picture shows a view taken three hours
later, or at eleven on May 28, when the planet appeared precisely as he
would have appeared at a quarter past eleven in the early morning of May
31, had weather then permitted Mr. Green to continue his observations.
You see in it the great north and south sea which Maraldi had noticed,
the other of those two which had deceived Hooke.

It will be seen from these drawings, which, be it remembered, were taken
at the telescope, that it is possible from a great number of such
drawings to make a chart of Mars, showing its lands and seas not as they
are seen in the telescope, but as they might be laid down by inhabitants
of Mars in a map or planisphere. This has been done, with gradually
increasing accuracy,--first by Sir W. Herschel, next by Beer and Mädler,
then by Phillips, and lastly by myself. (In claiming for my own chart
greater accuracy, I am simply asserting the superior completeness of the
list of telescopic drawings which I was able to consult.) The result is
shown in the accompanying chart (fig. 22), which presents the whole
surface of Mars divided into lands and seas and polar snows, with the
names attached of various observers who have at sundry times contributed
to our knowledge of the planet's features.

But now it will be asked by the thoughtful reader, how can any one
possibly be sure that the regions called continents and seas do really
consist of land and water? At any rate, the doubt might well be
entertained respecting the water. For land is a wide term, including all
kinds of rock surface, sand, earthy soil, and so forth; but it may seem
to require proof that the substance we call water really exists out
yonder in space, either in the form of snow and ice at the Martian
poles, or as flowing water in the Martian seas, or in the vaporous form
in the planet's air.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.--Chart of Mars, from 27 drawings by Mr.
Dawes.]

Very strange, then, at first must the statement seem, that we are as
sure of the existence of water in all these forms on Mars as if we had
sent some messenger to the planet who had brought back for study by our
chemists a block of Martian ice, a vessel full of Martian water, and a
flask of Martian air saturated with aqueous vapour. Indeed, I do not
know of any discovery effected by man which more strikingly displays the
power of human ingenuity in mastering difficulties which, at a first
view, seem altogether insuperable. When we know that a mass of ice as
large as Great Britain would appear at the distance of Mars a mere
bright point; that a sea as large as the Mediterranean would appear like
a faint, greenish-blue, streak; and that cloud masses such as would
cover the whole of Europe would only present the appearance of a whitish
glare, how hopeless seems the task of attempting to determine what is
the real chemical constitution of objects thus seen! It might well be
thought that no possible explanation of the method used by astronomers
could serve to establish its validity. Yet nothing can be simpler than
the principle of the method, or more satisfactory than its application
in this special case.

First, let the reader rid his mind of the difficulty arising from the
enormous distance of the celestial bodies. To do this let him note that
there are some things which a body close by can tell us no more
certainly than a remote body. For instance, we are just as certain that
Mars is a body capable of reflecting sunlight as we are that a
cricket-ball is. We know as certainly, too, that the quality of Mars is
such that more of the red of the sun's light is sent to us than of the
other colours. For we perceive that Mars is a ruddy planet. Since
distance in no way interferes with our perception of these general
facts, and others like them, we need not necessarily find in mere
distance any difficulty in the way of recognising some other facts. All
that we require to be shown before admitting the validity of the
evidence is, that it is of such a kind that distance does not affect its
_quality_, however much distance may and must affect the quantity of
evidence.

Now there is a means of taking the light which comes from a body shining
either with its own or with reflected light, and analyzing it into its
component colours. The spectroscope is the instrument by which this is
accomplished. I do not propose to describe here the nature of this
instrument, or the details of the various methods in which it is
employed. I note only that it separates the rays of different colour
coming from an object, and lays them side by side for us,--the red rays
by themselves, the orange rays by themselves, and so with the yellow,
green, blue, indigo, and violet. And not only are the rays of these
colours set by themselves, but the red rays are sorted in order, from
the deepest brown-red[11] to a tint of red (the lightest) which must
almost be called orange; the orange in order, from orange which must
almost be called red to a tint (the lightest orange) which must almost
be called yellow; the yellow, from an almost orange yellow to a yellow
just beginning to be tinged with green; the green, from an almost yellow
green (the lightest) to a green which may almost be called blue (the
darkest); the blue, from this tint to the beginning of the indigo; the
indigo, from this tint to the first rays of the violet; and lastly the
violet, through all the tints of this beautiful colour to a
blackish-brown violet, where the visible spectrum ends. All these tints
are sorted in order by the spectroscope, just as a skilful colourist
might range in due sequence a myriad tints of colour. But this is only
true of really white light, such light as comes from a glowing mass of
metal burning at a white heat. In other cases (even when the light may
seem white to the eye) some of the tints are found, when the
spectroscope spreads out the colours for us, to be missing. And we know
that this may be caused in two ways. Either the source of light never
gave out those missing tints; or, the source of light gave them out,
but some absorbing medium stopped them on their way before they reached
the spectroscope with which we examine them. There may be cases where we
cannot tell very easily which of these is the true cause. But sometimes
we can, as the instances I have now to deal with will show you.

The sun's own light shows under this method of spectroscopic analysis
millions of tints, in fact I might say millions of red tints, and so
forth, right through the spectral list of colours. But also many
thousands of tints are wanting. Imagine a rainbow-coloured ribbon, the
colours ranged along its length, so that the ribbon is black at both
ends, and that from the black of one end the colour merges into very
deep red, and thence by insensible gradations through orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, and violet, into the black of the other end. Then
suppose that tens of thousands of the fine threads which run athwart the
ribbon--_i.e._, the short cross threads--are drawn out. Then the ribbon,
laid on a dark background showing through the spaces where the threads
were drawn out, would represent the solar spectrum. We know then that
the light of the sun's glowing mass either wants particular tints
originally, or shines through vapours which prevent the free passage of
rays of those colours. Both causes might be at work, not one only. At
present we are not concerned with this particular point; but I only
mention that, in reality, no tints are actually wanting, though some are
very much enfeebled.

The sun's light falling on any opaque object is reflected. If the object
is white, the light gives exactly the same spectrum, only fainter. Thus,
I take a piece of white paper on which the sun's rays are falling, and
examine its light with one of Browning's spectroscopes. I get the
ordinary solar spectrum. The cold white paper gives me in fact a
spectrum which speaks of a heat so intense that the most stubborn metals
are not merely melted but vaporized in it. But this heat resides in the
sun, not in the paper.

Now, speaking generally, Mars also sends us sunlight, so that when we
spread out with the spectroscope the rays coming from this planet, we
get the solar spectrum, only of course very much enfeebled. _But_ close
examination shows that other tints besides those missing from the solar
spectrum are missing from the spectrum of Mars. He reflects to us the
sunlight, almost as it reaches him, but he abstracts from it a few tints
on his own account.

When we inquire what these tints are, we find that they are tints which
are _sometimes_ wanting even from direct sunlight. When the sun sinks
very low and looks like a great red ball through the moisture-laden
air, his spectrum is not the same exactly as that of the sun shining
high in the mid heaven. It shows other gaps than those corresponding to
the ordinary myriads of missing tints. Its red colour shows indeed that
some thing has happened to the sunlight; but, oddly enough (at first
sight at least), the gaps are chiefly in the red part of the spectrum,
just what one would expect if the sun's light showed a want instead of
an excess of ruddy light. The fact is, however, that the violet, indigo,
and blue are weakened altogether, not by the mere abstraction of tints
here and there. The red suffers under a few abstractions of tint, but
remains on the whole little weakened. Now the same gaps which at such
times appear in the spectrum of the sun are found (generally, if not
always) in the spectrum of the planet Mars, even when he is shining high
in the heavens, so that his light is _not_ at the time absorbed by the
denser portions of our air. In fact the gaps have been seen in the
spectrum of Mars when the planet has been shining higher in the heavens
than the moon, whose spectrum was found on trial (at the time) not to
show the same gaps,--as of course it must have done, and even more
markedly, if the missing tints had been abstracted by our own air.

No doubt can remain, then, that the sun's light, which reaches us after
falling on Mars, has suffered _at Mars_ the same absorption which our
own air produces on the rays of the sun when he is low down. But we know
what it is in our air which causes this absorption. It is the aqueous
vapour. We know this from several independent series of researches. It
was proved first by an American physicist, Professor Cooke of Harvard,
who found that these lines in the red are always darker when the air is
moister. Then by Janssen, who observed the spectrum of great bonfires
lit at a distance of many miles, on the Swiss mountains, finding these
same lines in the spectrum of the fire-light when the air was heavily
laden with moisture. Wherefore we know that the air of Mars must also
contain the same substance--the vapour of water--which, in our own air,
produces these dark lines. We can, indeed, understand that the ruddy
colour of Mars is in part due to this moisture, which, precisely as in
our own air it makes the sun and moon look red, would, in the air of a
planet, make the planet itself look red.

But how much follows from the discovery that there is moisture in the
air of Mars! This moisture can only come from water in sufficient
quantities. There must, therefore, be seas on Mars. We should be sure of
this from the spectroscopic evidence, even without the evidence given by
the telescope. We cannot doubt for a moment, however, knowing as we do
how the telescope shows greenish markings on Mars, that these really
are the seas and oceans of the planet. And again, the white spots at the
poles of Mars can no longer be regarded doubtfully. If we could not see
them, but knew only, from the spectroscopic evidence, that Mars must
have large seas, we should be sure that his polar regions must be
covered with everlasting ice and snow, varying with the seasons, but
always surrounding, in enormous masses, the poles themselves. Seeing
that the telescope presents spots to our view which, long before the
spectroscopic evidence had been obtained or hoped for, had been regarded
as analogues of our polar snows, we can now entertain no manner of doubt
that they really are so.

But again, recognising the presence of enormous masses of snow and ice
around the poles of Mars, and knowing that not only are there wide
oceans, seas, and lakes, but that there is an atmosphere capable of
carrying mist and cloud, how many circumstances, corresponding to those
which we associate with the wants of living creatures, present
themselves to our consideration! It remains that I should now consider
some of these points.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have seen that Mars has water in all its forms, solid, liquid, and
vaporous. We perceive also that his polar regions do not extend very
much farther towards his equator than do the polar ice and snows of our
own earth. (Of course the former do not extend so far in actual
distance; I refer to their extent compared with the globe they belong
to.) It would appear then, at a first view, that the climate of Mars
cannot be very unlike that of our earth. Yet this is scarcely possible.
For Mars is so much farther than we are from the sun that he receives
less than half as much light and heat from that luminary. And it is not
easy to conceive that the deficiency can be compensated by any effects
due to the nature of the Martian air. It is more likely by far that this
air is much rarer than that it is much denser than ours. For not only
can it be shown that with the same relative quantity of air a smaller
planet would have a smaller quantity above each square mile of its
surface than would a larger one,[12] but the gravity at the surface of
the smaller planet being less, the air there is much less compressed by
its own weight (having in fact much less weight), and is therefore
rarer. Thus the probability is that the air of Mars is like that at (or
even above) the summits of our highest mountains, where we know that an
intense cold prevails. It is not that the sun's rays do not fall there
with as much heating power as at the sea-level, for experiment shows
that they fall with even greater power. But there is less air to be
warmed and to retain the heat. The difference may be compared in fact to
that between a well-watered country near the sea and an arid desert. The
sun's rays fall as fiercely on one as on the other, but because there is
no moisture in the desert to receive (after the fashion characteristic
of water) the solar heat and retain it, the heat passes away so soon as
the sun has set, and intense cold prevails, while over the well-watered
region the temperature is much more uniform, and warm nights prevail. So
is it at the summits of lofty mountains. The sun's rays are poured on
them as hotly as elsewhere, but there is little air to retain the
moisture, so that the heat passes away almost as quickly as it is
received, and during the night as much fresh snow is formed as had been
melted during the day. And so it would certainly be with Mars, if, other
things being the same, the air were as rare as it is at the summits of
our loftiest mountains. If, as seems probable, the air is still rarer
than this, the cold would be still more intense.

It would seem, then, that either some important difference exists, by
which the Martian air is enabled to retain the sun's heat even more
effectively than our air does (for the climate as indicated by the
limits of the polar snows seems the same, though the distance from the
sun is greater); or else there is some mistake in the supposition that
the same general state of things prevails on Mars as on our own earth.

I confess that though Professor Tyndall has shown clearly how the
atmosphere of a more distant planet _might_ make up for the deficient
supply of solar heat, by more effectively retaining the heat, I know of
nothing in either the telescopic or the spectroscopic evidence
respecting any of the planets which tends to show, or even renders it
likely, that any such arrangement exists,--excepting always the
peculiarity in Mars's case which we are now endeavouring to explain.
Insomuch that should any other explanation of the difficulty be
suggested, and appear to have weight in its favour, I apprehend that the
mere possibility of an atmospheric arrangement, such as has been
suggested, should not prevent our admitting this other explanation.

I am inclined to think that there is such an explanation. It seems to me
that there are good reasons for regarding Mars as a planet which has
passed to a much later stage of planetary life than that through which
our earth is now passing, and that in this circumstance some of the
peculiarities of his appearance find their explanation. As a planet
outside the earth, Mars must probably be regarded as one formed somewhat
before the earth. As a much smaller planet, he would be not only less
heated when first found (whatever theory of planetary formation we
adopt), but would also have parted much more rapidly (relatively) with
his heat, according to the same law which makes a small mass of metal
cool more quickly than a large one. If he has a rarer atmosphere he
would be a colder planet on that account also. Being also remoter from
the sun, he receives less heat from that orb, and we thus have a fourth
reason for regarding Mars as a much colder planet than our earth, both
as to inherent heat and as to heat received from without. It seems to me
that we may in this consideration find the real meaning of the
comparatively limited extension of the Martian snows. It has been well
pointed out by Professor Tyndall that for the formation of great glacial
masses, not great cold only, but great heat also is required. The snows
which fall on mountain slopes, to be compacted into ice and afterwards
to form great glaciers, were raised into the air by the sun's heat.
Every ice particle represents the action of that heat upon the particles
of water at the surface of ocean, sea, or lake, or of wet soil. If the
sun's heat suddenly died out, there would prevail an intense cold, and
the snows and ice now existing would assuredly remain. The waters also
of the earth would congeal. But no new snows would fall. The congealed
seas viewed from some remote planet would appear unchanged. For they
would not be covered with snow and broken ice, nor therefore white; but
would consist of pure ice throughout, retaining the partial transparency
and greenish colour of deep-sea water. No winds would disturb the
surface of the frozen seas, for winds have their origin in heat, and
with the death of the solar heat the winds would utterly die out also.

If we are to choose between these two explanations,--one that the snows
and ice have not the great range we should expect, because the
temperature is somehow raised despite Mars's greater distance to the
same temperature which we experience, and the other that it is not heat
but cold which diminishes the quantity of Martian snow, I conceive that
there is every reason the case admits of for accepting the latter
instead of the former explanation. As extreme cold would certainly
prevent glacial masses from being very large and deep, simply because
the stores whence the ice was gathered would be less, the snow caps of a
very cold planet would vary as readily with varying seasons as those of
a planet like our earth. For though less heat would be poured upon them
with the returning summer, less heat would be required to melt away
their outskirts.

I think we may fairly regard Mars as in all probability a somewhat old
and decrepit planet. He is not absolutely dead, like our own moon, where
we see neither seas nor clouds, neither snow nor ice, no effects, in
fine, of either heat or cold. But I think he has passed far on the road
towards planetary death,--that is, towards that stage of a planet's
existence when at least the higher forms of life can no longer exist
upon the planet's surface.

There is one peculiarity of the planet's appearance which seems
strikingly to accord with this view that Mars holds a position
intermediate between that of our earth and the moon,--as indeed we might
fairly expect from his intermediate proportions. The seas of our earth
cover nearly three-quarters of her entire globe. The moon has no visible
water on her surface. If we examine the chart of Mars at page 167, we
see that the seas and oceans of the planet are much smaller (relatively
as well as actually) than are the seas of our own earth. I have
carefully estimated their relative extent in the following simple but
effective way. I drew a chart such as the above-mentioned, but on a
projection of my own invention, in which equal surfaces on a globe are
represented by equal surfaces on the planisphere. Then I cut out with a
pair of scissors the parts representing land and the parts representing
water (leaving the polar parts as doubtful), and carefully weighed these
in a delicate balance. I found that they were almost exactly equal:
whatever preponderance there was seemed to be in favour of the land.
Thus, if we assume that, when in the same stage of planetary existence,
Mars had as great a relative extent of water surface as our earth, or
that about 72/100 of the surface of Mars were originally water, we
should have to admit that the water had so far been withdrawn into the
planet's interior as to diminish the water-surface by 22/100 (for there
are now barely 50/100). At a very fair assumption as to the slopes of
the Martian sea-bottoms, it would follow that more than half the Martian
water originally existing above the surface had been withdrawn into the
interior, as the planet's mass gradually cooled.

I am aware the assumption above mentioned is in itself somewhat daring,
and is not supported by direct evidence. But, since we have very strong
reasons for considering that the moon once had seas, which have been
withdrawn in the way suggested, and since Mars unquestionably holds a
position midway between the earth and moon as to size and presumably as
to age,[13] it seems not unreasonable to find in the character of her
seas,--less extended relatively than the earth's, but, unlike the
moon's, still existing,--the evidence that she has gone partially
through the process through which the moon has long since passed
completely.

I think it very likely that the recent discovery of two Martian
satellites will lead many to look with more disfavour than ever on the
idea that Mars may not at present be the abode of life. For moons seem
so manifestly convenient additions to a planet's surroundings, as
light-givers, time-measurers, and tide-rulers, that many will regard the
mere fact that these conveniences exist as proof positive that they are
at this present time subserving the purposes which they are capable of
subserving. I would point out, however, that our own moon must have
existed for ages before any living creatures, far less any reasoning
beings, could profit by her light, or by the regularity of her motions,
or by her action in swaying the waters of ocean. And doubtless she will
continue to exist for ages after all life shall have passed away from
the earth. Again, there can be no question that our earth would present
a most attractive scene if she were viewed from the moon, and would be a
most useful ornament of the lunar skies. Yet we have every reason to
believe that there is not a living creature on the moon at present to
profit by her light. The case may well be the same (apart from the
actual evidence that it _is_ the same) with Mars. His satellites may
long since have served most useful purposes to his inhabitants; but it
by no means follows that because if there were inhabitants on Mars now
the same purposes would still be subserved, therefore there are
inhabitants there.

Let us, however, without considering the question whether the satellites
of Mars serve such special purposes for creatures living on the planet,
consider briefly the history of their discovery, their nature, and the
laws of their motion around the planet.

Astronomers had long examined the neighbourhood of Mars with very
powerful telescopes, in the hope of discovering Martian moons. But the
hope had so thoroughly been abandoned for many years that the planet had
come to be known as "moonless Mars." The construction, however, of the
fine telescope which has been mounted at Washington, with an
object-glass twenty-six inches in diameter, caused at least American
astronomers to hope that after all a Martian moon or two might be
discovered. Taking advantage of the exceptionally favourable
opportunity presented during the planet's close approach to our earth in
the autumn of 1877, Prof. Asaph Hall, of the Washington Observatory,
paid special attention to the search for Martian moons. At last, on
August 16, 1877, he detected close by the planet a faint point of light,
which he was unable to examine further at the time (to see if it behaved
as a satellite, or as one of the fixed stars). But on the 18th he saw it
again, and determined its nature. He also saw another still fainter
point of light closer to the planet; and subsequent observations shewed
that this object also was a satellite. During the next few weeks both
the moons were observed as closely as possible, in fact, whenever
weather permitted, and the result is that we now know the true nature of
their paths.

In fig. 23 these paths are shown as they appeared in 1877. Of course the
paths themselves are not seen; but if the satellites left behind them a
fine train or wake of light, the shape of this train would be as shown
in fig. 23. The satellites themselves could not be shown at all in a
picture on so small a scale--the diameter of either would certainly be
less than the cross-breadth of the fine elliptical line representing its
track. The size of the planet is correctly indicated, and the true pose
of the planet in 1877 is shown in the figure, his southern pole being
somewhat bowed towards the earth. This is the uppermost pole; for the
figure represents the planet and his satellites' orbits as they would
appear in an astronomical telescope, which inverts objects.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.--Mars and the paths of the Martian satellites as
at present situated.]

The outer satellite is probably not more than ten miles or so in
diameter, the inner one, perhaps, the same; but neither can be measured.
In the most powerful telescopes they appear as mere points of light. Nor
is it easy to determine, from their lustre, or rather from their
faintness, their true dimensions; for we cannot compare them directly in
this respect with objects of known size, because their visibility is
partly affected by the proximity of the planet, whose overpowering light
dims their feeble rays. This remark applies with special force to the
inner satellite.

The distance of the outer satellite from Mars's centre is about 14,300
miles, from Mars's surface about 12,000 miles. The inner travels at a
distance of about 5,750 miles from the centre, and about 3,450 miles
from the surface of Mars.

The motions of the satellites as seen from Mars must be very different
from those of our own moon. Thus, our moon moves so slowly among the
stars that she requires nearly an hour to traverse a distance equal to
her own apparent diameter. The outer moon of Mars traverses a similar
distance--that is, not her own apparent diameter, but an arc on the
stellar heavens equal to our moon's apparent diameter--in about two and
a half minutes, while the inner moon moves so rapidly as to traverse the
same distance in about forty seconds. To both moons, therefore, but to
the inner in particular, Job's description of our moon as "walking in
brightness" would seem singularly applicable, so far at least as the
rapidity of their motions is concerned. Their brightness, however,
cannot be comparable to our moon's. For notwithstanding their much
greater proximity, it is easily shown that they must present much
smaller discs, and being illuminated by a more distant sun, their discs
cannot shine so brightly as our moon's. That is, not only are the discs
smaller, but their intrinsic brightness is less. Assuming the outer moon
to be ten miles, the inner fifteen miles in diameter, it is easily shown
that the two together, if full at the same time, can hardly give
one-twelfth as much light to Martians as our moon gives to us.

Yet there can be no doubt that the Martian moons must be (or _have
been_) most useful additions to the Martian skies. They do not give a
useful measure of time intermediate in length between the day and the
year, as our moon does; for the outer travels round the planet in about
thirty and a quarter hours, the inner in about seven and a half hours.
Nor can they exert an influence upon the Martian seas corresponding to
that exerted by our own moon in generating the lunar tidal wave. But
their motions must serve usefully to indicate the progress of time, both
by night and by day, for they must be visible by day unless very close
to the sun. They must be even more useful than our moon in indicating
the longitude of ships at sea, seeing that the accuracy with which a
moon indicates longitude is directly proportional to her velocity of
motion among the stars.

I have said that there does not seem to be any valid reason for
considering that now is the accepted time with these moons; their
services may have been of immense value in long past ages, and now be
valueless for want of any creatures to be benefited by them. But those
who not only believe that no object in nature was made without some
special purpose, but that we are able to assign to each object its
original purpose, should be well satisfied if they find reason for
believing that, during millions of years long, long ago, the moons
lately discovered by our astronomers were measuring time for past races
of Martians, swaying tides in wider seas than those which now lave the
shores of Martian continents, and enabling Martian travellers to guide
their course over the trackless ocean and arid desert with far greater
safety than can our voyagers by sea and land despite all the advances of
modern science.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] Brown is not the right word for the tint of red where the visible
spectrum begins. I know, however, of no word properly expressing the
colour.

[12] Suppose there are two planets A and B of equal density, of which A
has a diameter twice as great as that of B. Then the volume of A is
eight times greater than B's volume. So that if the volume of its
atmosphere exceed the volume of B's air in the same degree, the planet A
has eight times as much air as the planet B. But the surface of A is
only four times as great as the surface of B; so that if A had only four
times as much air as B, there would be the same quantity of air above
each square mile of A's surface as above each of B's surface. Since then
A has eight times--not merely four times--as much air as B, it follows
that A has twice as much air over each square mile of surface as B has.
And similarly in all such cases, the general law being that the larger
planet has more air over each square mile of surface in the same degree
that its diameter exceeds that of the other.

[13] By age here I do not mean absolute age, but relative age. I speak
of Mars and the Moon as older than the earth in the same sense that I
should speak of a fly in autumn as older than a five-year-old raven.




[Illustration]




X.

_THE PLANET JUPITER._


Two or three years ago I had occasion to consider in the _Day of Rest_
the giant planet Jupiter, the largest and most massive of all the bodies
circling around the sun. I then presented a new theory respecting
Jupiter's condition, to which I had been led in 1869, when I was
visiting other worlds than ours. Since then, in fact within the last few
months, observations have been made which place the new theory on a
somewhat firm basis; and I propose now briefly to reconsider the subject
in the light of these latest observations.

In the first place I would call the reader's attention to the way in
which modern science has altered our ideas respecting time as well as
space, though the change has only been noticed specially as it affects
space. In former ages men regarded the region of space over which they
in some sense had rule as very extensive indeed. This earth was the most
important body in the universe, all others being not only made for the
service of the earth, but being in all respects, in size, in range, and
so forth, altogether subordinate to it. Step by step men passed from
this to an entirely different conception of our earth's position in
space. Shown first to be a globe within the domain of the heavenly
bodies, then to be a globe subordinate to the sun, then to be a member
of one family among thousands each with its ruling sun, then to belong
to a galaxy of suns which is but one among myriads of millions of such
galaxies, and lastly shown to the eye of reason, though not to direct
observation, as belonging to a galaxy of galaxies itself but one among
millions of the same order, which in turn belong to higher and higher
orders endlessly, the earth has come to be regarded, despite its
importance to ourselves, as but a point in space. The minutest particle
by which a mathematician might attempt to picture the conception of a
mathematical point, comparing that particle with any near object however
large, a house, a mountain, the earth itself, would be but the grossest
representation of a point, by comparison with the massive earth, when
she is considered with reference to the universe of the fixed stars or
rather to that portion of the universe, itself but a point in space,
over which the survey of the astronomer extends.

All this has been admitted. Men have fully learned to recognise, though
they are quite unable to conceive, the utter minuteness, one may say the
evanescence, of their abode in space.

But along with the extension of our ideas respecting space, a
corresponding extension has been made, or should have been made, in our
conceptions respecting time. We have learned to recognise the time
during which our earth has been and will be a fit abode for living
creatures as exceedingly short compared with the time during which she
was being fashioned into fitness for that purpose, and with the æons of
æons to follow, after life has disappeared from her surface. This,
however, is but one step towards the eternities to which modern science
points. The earth is but one of many bodies of a system; and though it
has been the custom to regard the birth of that system as if it had been
effected, if one may so speak, in a single continuous effort (lasting
millions of millions of years, mayhap, but bringing all the planets and
their central sun simultaneously into fitness for their purpose), there
is no reason whatever for supposing this to have been really the case,
while there are many reasons for regarding it as utterly unlikely. It
seems as though men could not divest themselves of the idea that our
earth's history is the history of the solar system and of the universe.
Precisely as children can hardly be brought to understand, for a long
time, what history really means, how generation after generation of
their own race has passed away, and how their own race has succeeded
countless others, so science, still young, seems scarcely to appreciate
the real meaning of its own discoveries. It follows directly from these
that world after world like our earth, in this our own system or among
the millions peopling space, has had its day, and that the systems
themselves, on which such worlds attend, are but the existent
representatives of their order, and succeed countless other systems
which have long since served their purpose.

Yet, strangely enough, students of science continue for the most part to
speak of other worlds, and other suns, and other systems, as though this
present era, this "bank and shoal of time," were the sole period to
which to refer in considering the condition of those worlds and suns and
systems. It does not seem to occur to them that,--not possibly or
probably, but most certainly,--myriads among the celestial bodies must
be passing through stages preceding those which are compatible with the
existence or support of life, while myriads of others must long since
have passed that stage. And thus ideas appear strange and fanciful to
them which, rightly apprehended, are alone in strict accordance with
analogy. To consider Jupiter or Saturn as in the extreme youth of
planetary existence, still glowing with such heat as pervaded the whole
frame of our earth before she became a habitable world, still enveloped
in cloud masses containing within them the very oceans of those future
worlds, all this is regarded as fanciful and sensational. Yet those who
so regard such theories do not hesitate to admit that every planet must
once in its life pass through the fiery stage of planetary existence,
nor are they prepared to show any reason why the stage must be regarded
as past in the case of every planet or even of most of the planets.
Seeing that, on the other hand, there are abundant reasons for believing
that planets differ very widely as regards the duration of the various
stages of their life, and that our earth is by no means one of the
longest lived, we may very fairly expect to find among the planets some
which are very much younger than our earth,--not younger, it will be
understood, in years, but younger in the sense of being less advanced in
development. When we further find that all the evidence accords with
this view, we may regard it as the one to which true science points.

All that we know about the processes through which our earth has passed
suggests the probability, I will even say the certainty, that planets so
much larger than she is as are Jupiter and Saturn must require much
longer periods for every one of those processes. A vast mass like
Jupiter would not cool down from the temperature which our earth
possessed when her surface was molten to that which she at present
possesses in the same time as the earth, but in a period many times
longer.

Supposing Bischoff to be right in assigning 340,000,000 years to that
era of our earth's past, I have calculated that Jupiter would require
about seven times and Saturn nearly five times as long, or about
2,380,000,000 and 1,500,000,000 years respectively, and by these
respective periods would they be behind the earth as respects this stage
of development. Suppose, however, on the other hand, that Bischoff has
greatly overrated the length of that era--and I must confess that
experiments on the cooling of small masses of rock, such as he dealt
with, seem to afford very unsatisfactory evidence respecting the cooling
of a great globe like our earth. Say that instead of 340,000,000 years
we must assign but a tenth part of that time to the era in question.
Even then we find for the corresponding era of Jupiter's existence about
238,000,000 years, and for that of Saturn's 150,000,000 years, or in one
case more than 200,000,000 years longer, in the other more than
110,000,000 years longer than in our earth's case.

This relates to but one era only of our earth's past. That era was
preceded by others which are usually considered to have lasted much
longer. The earth, according to the nebular theory of Laplace, was once
a mighty ring surrounding the sun, and had to contract into globe form,
a process requiring many millions of years. When first formed into a
globe she was vaporous, and had to contract--forming the moon in so
doing--until she became a mass, first of liquid, then of plastic half
solid matter, glowing with fire and covered with tracts of fluent heat.
Here was another stage of her past existence, requiring probably many
hundreds of millions of years. Jupiter and Saturn had to pass through
similar stages of development, and required many times as many years for
each of them. Is it then reasonable to suppose that they have arrived at
the same stage of development as our earth, or indeed as each other.

Supposing for a moment that we were fully assured that Jupiter and
Saturn had separate existence, hundreds of millions of years before our
earth had been separated from the great glowing mass of vapour formerly
constituting the solar system, and that having this enormous start, so
to speak, they need not necessarily be regarded as now very greatly in
arrear as respects development, or might even be in advance of the
earth, it is altogether improbable that either of them, and far more
improbable that both of them, are passing through precisely the same
stage of development. If we knew only of two ships, that one had to
travel from New York to London, and another from Canton to Liverpool,
some time during the year, and that the one which had to make the longer
journey was likely to start several weeks before the other, would it not
be rather unsafe to conclude, when the former had entered the mouth of
the Thames, that in all probability the other was sailing up the Mersey?
Yet something like this, or in reality much wilder than this, is the
reasoning which permits the student of science to believe, independently
of the evidence, or altogether against all evidence, that Jupiter and
Saturn are necessarily passing through the very stage of planetary
existence through which the one planet we know much about is passing.

It seems to me that the student of science should be prepared to widen
his conceptions of time even as he has been compelled to widen his
conceptions of space. As he knows that the planets are not, as was once
supposed, mere attendants upon our earth and belonging to her special
domain in space, so should he understand that neither do the other
planets appertain of necessity to the domain of time in which our
earth's existence has been cast, or only do so in the same sense that
like her they occupy a certain domain in space, not her domain, but the
sun's. Their history in time, like hers, doubtless belongs to the
history of the solar system, but the duration of that system enormously
surpasses the duration of the earth as a planet, and immeasurably
surpasses the duration of that particular stage of life through which
she is now passing.

Prepared thus to view the other planets independently of preconceived
ideas as to their resemblance to our own earth, we shall not find much
occasion to hesitate, I think, in accepting the conclusion that Jupiter
is a very much younger planet.

We have seen already that the enormous mass of Jupiter, surpassing that
of our earth 340 times, is suggestive of the enormous duration of every
stage of his existence, and therefore of his present extreme youth. His
bulk yet more enormously exceeds that of our earth, as, according to the
best measurements, no less than 1230 globes, as large as our earth,
might be formed out of the mighty volume of the prince of planets. In
this superiority of bulk, nearly four times greater than his vast
superiority of mass, we find the first direct evidence from observation
in favour of the theory that Jupiter is still intensely hot. How can a
mass so vast, possessing an attractive power in its own substance so
great that, under similar conditions, it should be compressed to a far
greater degree than our earth, and be, therefore, considerably more
dense, come to be considerably rarer? We no longer believe that there is
any great diversity of material throughout the solar system. We cannot
suppose, as Whewell once invited us to do, that Jupiter consists wholly
or almost wholly of water. Nor can we imagine that any material much
lighter than ordinary rocks constitutes the chief portion of his bulk.
We are, to all intents and purposes, forced to believe that the
contractive effect due to his mighty attractive energy is counteracted
by some other force. Nor can we hesitate, since this is admitted, to
look for the resisting force in the expansive effects due to heat. We
know that in the case of the sun, where a much mightier contractive
power is at work, a much more intense heat so resists it that the sun
has a mean density no greater than Jupiter's. We have every reason,
then, which bulk and mass can supply, to believe that Jupiter is far
hotter than the earth--that in fact, as the sun, exceeding Jupiter more
than 1000 times in volume, is many times hotter than he is, so Jupiter,
exceeding our earth 1200 times in volume, is very much hotter than the
earth.

[Illustration: Fig. 24.--The Planet Jupiter.]

But when we consider the aspect of Jupiter we find that similar
reasoning applies to his atmosphere. The telescope shows Jupiter as an
orb continually varying in aspect, so as to assure us that we do not see
his real surface. The variable envelope we do see presents, further, all
the appearance of being laden with enormously deep clouds. The figure
(24) shows the planet as seen by Herr Lohse on February 5, 1872, and
serves to illustrate the rounded clouds often seen in Jupiter's
equatorial zone, as though floating in the deep atmosphere there.
Although rounded clouds such as these are not constantly present, they
are very often seen; their appearance, even on a few occasions only,
would suffice for the argument I now propose to draw from them. It is
impossible to regard them as _flat_ round clouds. Manifestly they are
globular. Now they may not be quite as deep as they are long, or even
broad, but supposing them only half as deep as they are broad, that
would correspond to much more than a third of the diameter of our earth,
shown in the same picture. The atmosphere in which they float would
necessarily be deeper still, but that depth alone would be about 3,000
miles. Now an atmosphere 3,000 miles deep under the tremendous
attraction of Jupiter's mass would be compressed near its base to a
density many times exceeding that of the densest solids _if_ (which of
course is impossible) it could remain in the gaseous form with such
density. The fact, then, that an atmosphere, certainly gaseous, exists
around Jupiter to this enormous depth at least, proves to demonstration
that there must be some power resisting its attractive energy; and
again, we have little choice but to admit that that power is no other
than the planet's intense heat.

As we extend our scrutiny into the evidence from direct observation, we
find still other proofs independent of those just considered. One proof
alone, be it remembered, is all that is required, but it will be found
that there are many.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have found reasons for believing that the planet Jupiter is expanded
by heat in such sort that the contractive or condensing power of his own
mighty attractive energy is overcome. We know certainly that, regarding
the planet we see as a whole, its globe is of very small density. We
have every reason to believe that it is made of the same materials,
speaking generally, as our earth. We know that its mass as a whole
possesses many times the gravitating power of our earth's mass. It is
highly probable, therefore, that the condition of its substance is very
different from that of our earth's substance. And as we know of no cause
save heat which could keep the planet in this state, it is altogether
probable that the planet is extremely hot. The argument, be it noticed,
is independent of that based on the probability that Jupiter, owing to
his enormous mass, has not cooled nearly so much as our earth has.

We then noticed another very powerful argument, similar in kind, but
also quite independent, derived from the aspect of the planet. Jupiter's
appearance indicates clearly that he has a deep cloud-laden atmosphere,
and we know that such an atmosphere, if of the same temperature as our
earth's, would be compressed enormously, whereas the observed mobility
of Jupiter's cloud-envelope, and other circumstances, indicate that this
enormous compression does not exist. We infer, then, that some cause is
at work expanding the atmosphere; and we know of no other cause but heat
which could do so effectively.

But now let us consider certain details which the telescope has brought
to our knowledge.

In the first place, a number of circumstances indicate a tremendous
activity in that deep cloud-laden air.

The cloud-belts sometimes change remarkably in appearance and shape in a
very short time. Mr. Webb, in his excellent little treatise, "Celestial
Objects for Common Telescopes," gives instances from the observations of
South, which I here translate into non-technical terms:--On June 3,
1839, at about nine in the evening, South saw with his large telescope,
just below the principal belt of Jupiter, a spot of enormous size. It
was dark, and therefore probably represented an opening in a great
cloud-layer by which a lower or inner layer was brought into view. (For
though the planet's real globe may be so intensely hot as to emit a
great deal of light, it is probable that most of the light so emitted is
concealed by the enwrapping cloud masses, and that the greater part of
the light we receive from the planet is reflected sunlight; so that the
inner cloud-layers would be the darker.) South estimated this spot as
about 20,000 miles in diameter. "I showed it," he says, "to some
gentlemen who were present; its enormous extent was such that on my
wishing to have a portrait of it, one of the gentlemen, who was a good
draughtsman, kindly undertook to draw me one; whilst I, on the other
hand, extremely desirous that its actual magnitude should not rest on
estimation, proposed, on account of the scandalous unsteadiness of the
large instrument, to measure it with my five-feet telescope. Having
obtained for my companion the necessary drawing instruments, I went to
work, he preparing himself to commence his." But on looking into the
telescope, South was astonished to find that the large dark spot, except
at its eastern and western edges, had become much whiter than any of the
other parts of the planet; and thirty-four minutes after these
observations had commenced, "these" [query three?] "miserable scraps
were the only remains of a spot which but a few minutes before had
extended over at least 20,000 miles,--or two and a half times the
diameter of the earth."

The cloud envelope, then, of Jupiter is certainly not in a state of
quiescence. Of course we need not suppose that winds had carried cloud
masses athwart the tremendous opening seen by South. That would imply a
motion of 10,000 miles in the half-hour or so of observation,--supposing
contrary winds to have rushed towards the centre,--or double that
velocity if the entire breadth of the spot had been traversed in that
time. A velocity of 20,000 miles, and still more of 40,000 miles per
hour, may fairly be regarded as incredible. It would exceed more than a
hundred-fold (taking the least number) the velocity of our most
tremendous hurricanes. And although the solar hurricanes would seem to
have a velocity, at times, of 300,000 or 400,000 miles per hour, we have
no reason for supposing that winds of tens of thousands of miles per
hour could be raised in the atmosphere of Jupiter. As I have said,
however, it is not necessary to suppose this. We may conceive that
clouds had formed very rapidly at the higher elevation where before they
had been wanting. Clouds may form as readily and quickly over an area a
thousand miles across as over an area two or three miles across. Indeed
Webb, referring to such changes as South witnessed, says that Sir J.
Herschel once observed a cloud-bank in our own air, which formed so
rapidly that it crossed the sky at the rate of 300 miles an hour, not
moving, of course, at that rate, but being formed along different parts
of its apparent progress almost simultaneously, so as to appear to
travel with this enormous velocity.

But now I wish the reader specially to notice how this observation of
South's may serve to explain another, equally remarkable and at first
sight far more perplexing; and how, when the two observations are
brought together, a very singular piece of information is obtained
respecting Jupiter's cloud-envelope.

Let _a b_, fig. 25, represent the great dark space seen by South, just
below the principal belt, and let us suppose the planet turned round
until this dark space, or rather this opening in the planet's outer
cloud-envelope, is brought to the edge as at _a c d_, fig. 26. Then
this opening would really cause a depression in the planet's outline at
_d c_, the shaded part being depressed. The depression might not be
observable in any ordinary telescope. For at the edge of Jupiter the
features of the belt are generally lost, and the outline is at all times
smoothed in appearance by that peculiarity of vision which makes all
bright objects seen on a dark background appear somewhat larger than
they actually are. (This is _really_ due to a fringing, as it were, of
the image on the retina of the eye.) But though the depression might not
be recognisable, it would exist, and, as we shall presently see, it
might be detected in another way than by being actually seen. When the
clouds formed which concealed the spot,--we do not know how quickly, but
certainly in less than thirty-four minutes,--the depression, had the
spot been at the edge, would have been removed. This change, however,
like the existence of the depression, would doubtless not have been
discernible by ordinary vision.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 25.      Fig. 26.
]

Now, let us consider the second observation mentioned above.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 27.      Fig. 28.      Fig. 29.
]

On Thursday, June 26, 1828, the second satellite of Jupiter was about to
make a passage across the planet's face. It was observed, just before
this passage or transit began, in the position shown in fig. 27 by the
late Admiral Smyth. He was using an excellent telescope. It gradually
made its entry, looking for a few minutes like a small white mountain on
the edge of the planet, and finally disappeared. The reader must
understand that the moon was not hiding itself behind the planet, but
was on _this_ side of it, and simply lost to view because its brightness
was the same, or very nearly the same, as that of the planet's edge.
(Its place is shown in fig. 28, but of course the little dark ring was
not so seen.) "At least 12 or 13 minutes must have elapsed," says Smyth,
"when, accidentally turning to Jupiter again, to my astonishment I
perceived the same satellite outside the disc," as shown in fig. 29. It
remained visible there for at least four minutes, and then suddenly
vanished. To show that the observation was not due to any local or
personal peculiarity, it is only necessary to mention that two other
astronomers, Mr. Maclear at Biggleswade, and Dr. Pearson at South
Kilworth, observed the same extraordinary behaviour of Jupiter's second
satellite. The three telescopes are thus described by Admiral Smyth,--

  Mr. Maclear's, 3⅓ inches in opening, 3½ feet long;
  Dr. Pearson's, 6¾ inches in opening, 12 feet long;
  Adm. Smyth's, 3½ inches in opening, 5 feet long;

all good observing telescopes. Now, of course, the satellite did not
really stop. Nothing short of a miracle could have stopped the
satellite, or, if the satellite could have stopped, have set it
travelling on again as usual. For the satellite did not lose one mile,
or change its velocity by the thousandth part of a mile per hour or even
per annum.

But suppose such a change had taken place at the edge of Jupiter as we
have seen would certainly have taken place there if the changes
affecting the spot which South saw had occurred to a region at the edge,
as in fig. 26, instead of the middle, as in fig. 25. Then Smyth's
observation would be perfectly explained. We require, indeed, to suppose
the change occurring in a different order, the outer cloud-layer being
in the first instance well-developed and very rapidly becoming
dissipated, so that the outline which had at first been at its usual
level, was very rapidly depressed to the inner cloud-layer. But, of
course, if the rapid formation of clouds by condensation can occur on
Jupiter, so also can the rapid dissipation occur, especially at that
particular part where Smyth saw the satellite behave so strangely. For
that part is being carried, by the planet's swift rotation, into
sunlight, and the extra heat to which it is thus exposed might readily
effect the dissipation of widely extended cloud strata, supposing the
temperature near that critical value at which clouds form or are
dissipated.

Here, then, is an explanation of a phenomenon which otherwise seems
utterly inexplicable. The explanation requires only that a process like
one which has been observed to occur on Jupiter's disc should occur at a
part of his surface forming at the moment a portion of his outline. If
we had never known of such changes as South and other observers have
noted in the markings of Jupiter, we should be compelled by Smyth's
observation to admit their possibility. If we had never known of Smyth's
observation we should be compelled by South's to admit that such a
change of outline as is indicated by Smyth's observation must be
possible,--must, in fact, occur whenever cloud-masses form or are
dissipated over wide areas at the apparent edge of the planet. When we
have both forms of evidence it seems altogether unreasonable to
entertain any further doubt on this point.

But Smyth's observation, thus interpreted, indicates an enormous
distance between the outer and inner cloud-layers which formed the
planet's edge near the satellite in figs. 28 and 29 respectively. I find
after making every possible allowance for errors in his estimate of
time, not taken it would seem from his observatory clock, that the
distance separating these cloud-layers cannot have been less than 3,500
miles, or not far from half the diameter of our earth. It is the
startling nature of this result which perhaps deters many from accepting
the explanation of Smyth's observation here advanced. But there is no
other explanation. The satellite cannot have stopped in its course;
Jupiter cannot have shifted his place bodily; the satellite was on this
side of the planet,--therefore no effects of the planet's atmosphere on
the line of sight from the planet can help us; three observers at
different stations saw the phenomenon,--therefore neither effects of our
earth's atmosphere nor personal peculiarities can account for the
strange phenomenon. "Explanation is set at defiance," says Webb;
"demonstrably neither in the atmosphere of the earth nor Jupiter, where
and what could have been the cause?" The explanation I have advanced is
the only possible answer to this question.

I might occupy twenty times the space here available to me in detailing
various other phenomena all pointing in the same way,--that is, all
tending to show that Jupiter is a planet glowing with intense heat,
surrounded by a deep cloud-laden atmosphere, intensely hot in its lower
portions, but not necessarily so in the parts we see, and undergoing
changes (consequences of heat) of a stupendous nature, such as the small
heat of the remote sun, which shines on Jupiter with less than the 27th
part of the heat we receive, could not by any possibility produce. But
partly because space will not permit, partly because most of these
phenomena have been described in my "Orbs Around Us," and "Other
Worlds," I content myself by describing a singular observation recently
made, which, with South's and Smyth's, seems to place the theory I have
advanced beyond the possibility of doubt or cavil.

Mr. Todd of Adelaide has recently obtained for his observatory a fine
8-inch telescope by Mr. Cooke. With this instrument, mounted in
December, 1874, he has made many valuable observations of the motions of
Jupiter's satellites. Ordinarily, of course, the entry of each satellite
on the planet's face and the egress therefrom, the disappearance of each
satellite behind the planet or in the planet's shadow (not necessarily
the same thing) and the reappearance, are effected in what may be
called the normal way; and Mr. Todd's experience in this respect has
been like that of other observers. But on two occasions he and his
assistant, Mr. Ringwood, observed that a satellite, when passing behind
the planet's edge, did not disappear at once, but remained visible as if
seen through the edge, for about two minutes. The same satellite behaved
thus on each occasion,--viz. the satellite nearest the planet. As this
satellite travels at the rate of about 645 miles per minute, it would
follow that the satellite was seen through a depth of nearly 1300 miles,
or, after making all possible allowance for optical illusions, some 900
or 1000 miles. The effect of refraction cannot then be great in the air
of Jupiter, to this depth below the usual limit of the upper
clouds,--for otherwise the satellite would have been altogether
distorted. And this very fact, that for 1000 miles or so below the
highest clouds the change of atmospheric density is not sufficient to
produce any noticeable refractive effects, implies that the true base of
the atmosphere of Jupiter lies very far lower yet--perhaps many hundreds
of miles lower.

If the reader now look again at the picture at page 201, he will
understand, I think, how those great round white clouds in the chief
belt,--clouds thousands of miles long and broad,--are probably hundreds
of miles deep also, and float in an atmosphere still deeper.

All that we know about Jupiter, in fine, from direct observation, as
well as all that we can infer respecting the past history of the solar
system, tends to show that he is still an extremely young planet. He is
the giant of the solar family in bulk, and probably he is far older than
our earth in years; but in development he is, in all probability, the
youngest of the sun's family of planets, and certainly far younger than
the earth on which we live.




[Illustration]




XI

_THE RINGED PLANET SATURN._


Very different from the ruddy planet which approached so closely to him
in November, 1877, is Saturn, the ringed world, the most wonderful of
all the planets if the complexity of the system attending on him is
considered, and in size inferior only to the giant Jupiter.

It will have been noticed, perhaps, by those who are familiar with the
aspect of the planets, that the contrast between Mars and Saturn during
their late approach to us was not only greater than usual, but greater
than was to be expected even when account was taken of the unusual
lustre of Mars. I have often wondered whether the ancient astronomers
were ever perplexed by the varying lustre of Saturn. They recognised the
fact that Mars has an orbit of great eccentricity (see the picture of
the orbits of Mars, Venus, etc., at page 156); and there was nothing in
the varying lustre of Mars which could not be perfectly well explained
by his known variations of distance, whether the Ptolemaic or the
Copernican system were accepted. But with Saturn the case is different.
His distance at successive returns to our midnight skies is subject to
moderate changes only. Yet his brilliancy varies in a remarkable manner.
We now know that those changes are due to the opening and closing of
that marvellous system of rings which renders this planet the most
beautiful of all the objects of telescopic observation which the heavens
present to us. When the edge of the rings is turned towards the earth,
we see only the most delicate thread of light on either side of the
planet's disc. But when the rings are opened out to their full extent
they reflect towards us as much light as we receive from the disc. At
such times the planet presents a much more brilliant appearance than
when the ring is turned nearly edgewise; in fact to the naked eye he
seems very nearly twice as bright. Now at present the rings are turned
nearly edgewise towards the earth. In July and August, 1869, the planet
presented in the telescope the appearance presented in fig. 30, where it
will be seen that the shorter axis of the oval into which any one of the
ring-outlines is thrown is nearly equal to half the larger axis. Since
then the rings have been slowly closing up; and at present the rings
are so little open that the corresponding shorter axis, if it could be
directly seen, would appear to be about one-sixteenth only of the larger
axis. The rings were turned exactly edgewise towards the sun at two in
the afternoon, on St. Valentine's day, 1878, according to calculations
which I made in 1864, and published in a table under the head "Passages
of the Rings plane through the Sun between the years 1600 and 2000," in
my treatise entitled "Saturn and its System." The _Nautical Almanac_ for
1878, indeed makes the passage of the rings plane through the sun occur
somewhat earlier, stating that at noon on February 14 the sun's centre
would pass south of the ring's horizon by about one-fifth of its
apparent diameter (as seen by us). But my own calculation took into
account certain small details which, in matters of this sort, the
_Nautical Almanac_ computers neglect. After all, it mattered very little
to terrestrial observers whether the sun's light passed from the
northern to the southern side of the rings a few hours earlier or later:
the moment when it passed could not possibly be observed, even if it had
occurred during the night hours. In the present instance it occurred at
midday, and unfortunately none of the interesting phenomena presented in
powerful telescopes when the rings are turned edgewise to the sun or
earth could be observed, for they occurred when Saturn and the sun were
nearly in the same part of the heavens, and when the planet therefore
was utterly lost in the splendour of the solar rays.

[Illustration: Fig. 30.--The planet Saturn in July and August, 1869.]

But now let us briefly consider what is known or may be surmised
respecting the noble planet which was so far outshone in November, 1877,
by the comparatively minute orb of Mars.

Saturn travels at a distance from the sun exceeding rather more than
nine and a half times that of our own earth. The second figure of orbits
(see page 157) shows the wide span of his orbit compared with the
earth's, and yet it will be seen that the orbits of Uranus and Neptune,
planets unknown to the ancients, are so wide that the path of Saturn
becomes in turn small by comparison.

Saturn has a globe about 70,000 miles in diameter, where it bulges out
at the equator; but he is somewhat flattened at his poles, so that his
polar diameter is about 7000 miles less than the equatorial diameter. In
volume he exceeds our earth about 700 times; but in mass only about
ninety times: for his mean density is but about 13/100 of the earth's.
In fact, if we could imagine an ocean of water wide enough and deep
enough for the planets to be all set in it, Saturn would float with
about one-fourth of his bulk out of water,--always supposing that no
change took place in his density directly after he was immersed. Saturn,
indeed, would float highest of all the planets, or rather all of them
would sink except Saturn and Neptune, and Saturn would float higher than
Neptune. Uranus would just sink. Jupiter is half as heavy again as he
should be to float. All the terrestrial planets, Mercury, Venus, the
Earth, and Mars, would go to the bottom at once.

It is almost impossible to regard any feature of Saturn as better
deserving to be considered first than his ring system. Yet for the sake
of preserving a due sequence of ideas we must first consider his globe.

We find ourselves at once in presence of difficulties like those we
encountered when we considered the planet Jupiter. How is it that the
mighty mass of a planet like Saturn, constructed, we have every reason
to believe, of materials resembling those which constitute our earth,
has so failed to gather in its substance that the mean density is much
less than that of the earth's globe? It must be remembered that gravity
prevails throughout the frame of Saturn as throughout our earth's frame.
Every particle of that enormous globe is drawn towards the centre with a
force almost exactly the same as would be exerted by the attraction of
the entire mass of that portion of the planet which lies nearer to the
centre than the particle, if this mass were collected at the centre. But
this is not all. It is not merely the attraction exerted on each
particle of Saturn's mass which has to be considered, but the entire
_weight_ of all the superincumbent matter. The distinction between
attraction and weight, by the way, is very commonly overlooked in
considering the planets' interiors. I think it was Sir David Brewster
who argued that as attraction can easily be shown to diminish downwards
towards the centre, it is possible to conceive that the interior of a
planet may be hollow. The error is readily perceived, if we take a
familiar instance where the attraction is the same yet the effect of
pressure very much greater. (Without voyaging to the centre of the
earth, which is troublesome, and certainly not a familiar experience, we
cannot reach places where the attraction of gravity is greatly less
than at the surface.) Take a massive arch of brickwork: the bricks near
the top are subject to the same attraction as those belonging to the
foundation; but the pressure to which the foundation bricks are exposed
is very much greater than that affecting the upper bricks. So again with
a deep sea: the particles at the bottom of such a sea are subject to no
greater attraction than the particles near the top; but we know that a
strong hollow case of metal which near the top of such a sea would be
scarcely pressed at all, and would suffer no change of shape, will be
crushed perfectly flat under the tremendous pressure to which it will be
exposed when sunk to the bottom.

There is, in fact, no escape from the conclusion that the interior
portions of a planet like Saturn or Jupiter, nay, even of a body like
our earth or the moon, must be subject to tremendous pressure, a
pressure exceeding many hundred-fold the greatest which we can obtain
experimentally, and that under that enormous pressure the density of the
materials composing those central parts must be increased. How is it
then that Saturn is of much smaller density than the earth? I can
imagine no other explanation at once so natural and so complete as this,
that an intense heat pervading the entire frame of the planet enables it
to resist the tremendous pressure due to mere weight. The planet's mass
is expanded by the heat; large portions which at ordinary temperatures
would be solid are liquified or even vaporised; matters which are liquid
on our earth are vaporised; and, in fine, the planet assumes (as seen
from our distant station) the appearance of being very much larger than
it really is. We measure not the true globe, which, for aught that is
known, may be exceedingly dense, but the dimensions of cloud-layers
floating high in the planet's atmosphere.

In describing Jupiter, I considered the changes which have been noticed
in that planet's outline, and observed that it is impossible adequately
to explain the evidence, without assuming that the changes of outline
are real. The outline is not that of a solid globe, however, but of
cloud-layers surrounding such a globe, and probably at a great distance
from its surface.

[Illustration: Fig. 31.--Saturn's square-shouldered aspect.]

In Saturn's case we have very singular evidence to the same purpose. It
was observed by Sir W. Herschel in April, 1805, that Saturn occasionally
appears distorted, as though bulging out in the latitudes midway between
the pole and the equator of the planet. Fig. 31 represents the
appearance of the planet so far as shape is concerned, but the ring was
not, when Sir W. Herschel observed it, so narrow as it is shown in fig.
31. In fact the ring had been turned edgewise to the earth two years
before; and when Herschel noticed the abnormal appearance of Saturn,
the rings had begun to open out, though their outermost outline was
still far within the regions of the planet which seemed to project as
shown. Fig. 31 in fact represents Saturn as seen by Schröter in 1803,
when, as he said, the planet did not seem to present a truly spheroidal
figure. Herschel tested his observations by using several telescopes of
different dimensions,--ten, seven, twenty, and forty feet in length. In
1818, when the rings were scarcely visible, Kitchener saw the planet as
shown in fig. 31, or "square-shouldered," as some have called it. On one
occasion the present Astronomer-Royal saw the planet of that figure. In
January, 1855, Coolidge, using the fine refractor of the Cambridge U.S.
Observatory, noticed that the equatorial diameter was not the greatest;
on the 9th the planet seemed of its usual shape; but on December 6,
Coolidge writes, "I cannot persuade myself that it is an optical
illusion which makes the maximum diameter of the ball intersect the limb
half-way between the northern edge of the equatorial belt, and the inner
ellipse of the inner bright ring." This was at a time when the rings
were nearly at their greatest opening; so that, including Schröter's
observation, we have Saturn out of shape when his ring has presented
every shape between that shown in fig. 30 and that shown in fig. 31.
Again, in the report of the Greenwich Observatory for 1860-61, when the
ring was nearly closed, it is stated that "Saturn has _sometimes_
appeared to assume the square-shouldered aspect." Lastly, the eminent
observers, G. Bond and G. P. Bond, father and son, have seen Saturn
abnormally shaped, flattened unduly in the north polar regions in 1848,
when the ring was turned edgewise towards us, and unsymmetrical in
varying ways in 1855-57, when the ring was most widely opened.

Yet the planet's outline is usually a perfect oval, and has been shown
to be so by careful measurements effected in some instances by the same
observers, who, making equally careful measurements, have found the
planet to be distorted.

Does it not seem abundantly clear that the great cloud-layers which
float in the atmosphere of Saturn have a widely varying range in height,
and that therefore as we see and measure the outline of the
cloud-layers, we see and measure in effect a planet which is variable in
figure? This seems so natural and complete an explanation of the
observed peculiarities that it appears idle on the one hand to reject
the evidence of some among the most skilful observers who have ever
lived; or, on the other, to imagine that the solid frame of the planet
has undergone changes so tremendous as would be involved by the observed
variations of outline if they really signified that a solid planet had
changed in shape.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mighty globe of Saturn turns upon its axis nearly as quickly as
Jupiter. It will be remembered that the Jovian day lasts only 9½ of our
hours, and as the diameter of Jupiter is about ten times the earth's,
the equatorial parts of the giant planet travel some twenty-six or
twenty-seven times as fast as those of our own earth, which move
(rotationally) at the rate of more than a thousand miles an hour.
Saturn's equatorial parts do not move quite so fast,--in fact, in this
respect, Jupiter comes first of all the members of the solar system,
including the sun himself. Saturn's equatorial circuit being almost nine
times the earth's, while his day is little more than five-twelfths of
the earth's, it follows that his equatorial parts move twelve-fifths of
nine times, or nearly twenty-two times faster than the earth's. Their
actual rotational rate is rather more than 22,000 miles an hour, or 367
miles a minute, or more than six miles a second. This is a wonderful
rate of motion. It always seems to me one of the most striking results
of modern astronomical research that we have to recognise in bodies like
that dull looking star,--the heavy slow-moving Saturn, as the ancients
called him,[14]--motions of such tremendous swiftness. The planet is not
only rushing bodily along through space with a velocity of nearly six
miles per second, but his equatorial parts are being carried round with
a velocity somewhat exceeding six miles per second. (The coincidence
must be regarded as accidental, but it has this curious effect, that the
equatorial parts of Saturn near the middle of the disc we see are
actually almost at rest with respect to the sun, being carried forward
with the planet at the rate of about five miles and nine-tenths per
second, and backward round the planet at the rate of about six miles
and one-tenth per second. In fact there are always two points on the
disc which are almost exactly at rest with respect to the sun, viz.,
those two points north and south of the equator where the rotational
velocity is about five miles and nine-tenths per second, the velocity of
Saturn in his orbit.)[15]

But let us turn from the contemplation of Saturn's globe, interesting
though it undoubtedly is, to study those marvellous objects, the
Saturnian rings.

The history of their discovery is interesting, but must not here detain
us long. Briefly, it runs as follows:--

Galileo, in July, 1610, observing the planet Saturn with a telescope not
powerful enough to show the rings, imagined at first that Saturn had two
companion planets, one on either side of him, as though helping the
planet along upon his road. (From a table relating to the rings, in my
treatise on "Saturn and its System," the aspect of the ring, at the time
of any such observation, can at once be inferred. In the present case,
for example, it will be seen from the table that the rings were closing
up as the time of their disappearance, December 28, 1612, drew near.) A
year and a half later, Galileo looked again at Saturn, and lo! the
companion planets were gone. He was perplexed beyond measure. "What is
to be said concerning so strange a metamorphosis?" he asked. "Are the
two lesser stars consumed after the manner of the solar spots? Have they
vanished or suddenly fled? Has Saturn, perhaps, devoured his own
children? Or were the appearances indeed an illusion or fraud, with
which the glasses have so long deceived me, as well as many others to
whom I have shown them? Now, perhaps, is the time come to revive the
well-nigh withered hopes of those who, guided by more profound
contemplations, have discovered the fallacy of the new observations, and
demonstrated the utter impossibility of their existence. I do not know
what to say in a case so surprising, so unlooked for, and so novel. The
shortness of the time, the unexpected nature of the event, the weakness
of my understanding, and the fear of being mistaken, have greatly
confounded me."

Hevelius was similarly perplexed by the constantly varying appearance of
the planet. "Saturn," he informed his contemporaries, "presents five
various figures to the observer, to wit--first, the mono-spherical;
secondly, the tri-spherical; thirdly, the spherico-ansated; fourthly,
the elliptico-ansated; fifthly, and finally, the spherico-cuspidated;"
of which we can only say, like Mr. Gilbert's Ferdinando, that "we know
it's very clever; but we do not understand it."

It was not till 1659 that Huyghens, using a telescope _forty yards
long_, was able to make out the real meaning of the appendages which had
so perplexed Galileo and Hevelius. He announced to the world, in an
anagram, his discovery that Saturn is girdled about by a flat ring
nowhere touching the planet.

Huyghens also discovered the largest of Saturn's moons. He looked for no
more, having the idea that, since six planets and six moons were now
known, no more moons existed.

In 1663 the Brothers Ball discovered that the rings are divided into
two, or, at any rate, that a broad black stripe, such as is shown in
fig. 30, separates the outer portion of the ring from the inner. Two
years later these observers saw the stripe on the northern side of the
rings, when the rings had so shifted in position that observers saw
their southern side. Dominic Cassini recognised a corresponding stripe
on the southern side. This was regarded as proving that there is a real
division between the rings. The width of the gap thus separating the
outside of the inner ring from the inside of the outer cannot be less
than 1,600 miles.

Cassini also detected another Saturnian moon in October, 1671, and,
later, he discovered three others, making five Saturnian moons in all.

Sir W. Herschel observed the rings with great care. He confirmed the
discovery of the great division between the rings; but rejected the idea
which was beginning to be entertained in his time, that there are many
divisions. He found reasons for suspecting, but never actually proved,
that the outer ring turns round in about 10½ hours.

He also detected two small moons close to the outer ring. One other
moon, detected independently by Bond at the Harvard Observatory,
Cambridge, U.S., and by Lassell in this country in 1848, completes the
set of eight moons now known to revolve around the planet Saturn. We
need not here say much more about these moons, saving, perhaps, to note
that the span of the entire Saturnian system of moons amounts to about
4,400,000 miles, nearly double that of the Jovian system. This is the
largest system of satellites known to us. It is wonderful to reflect,
when we look at the dull, slow-moving Saturn, that not only is the
planet itself 700 times larger than the earth, not only is it girdled
about by a ring system having a span exceeding more than 20 times the
diameter of this earth on which we live, but that the entire span of the
system over which that distant planet rules exceeds more than
eighteen-fold the distance separating our earth from the moon.

Return we now, however, to the consideration of the Saturnian
ring-system.

In 1850 a singular discovery was made. It was found by Bond, in America,
and, a few days later, independently, by Dawes, in England, that inside
the inner bright ring there is a dark ring almost as wide as the outer
bright ring. One of the strangest circumstances about this inner ring is
that where it crosses Saturn's disc the outline of the planet can be
distinctly traced _through_ the dark ring, which is thus, in a sense, a
semi-transparent body. I say "in a sense," because it does not follow
that it really consists of semi-transparent matter any more than it
follows from our being able to see through a gauze veil that the
individual threads forming the gauze are made of a semi-transparent
material.

On examining recorded observations of the planet evidence was found that
this dark ring is not, as was at first supposed, a recent formation.
Where it crosses Saturn it had been mistaken in former times for a dark
belt.

It had always been supposed that the rings are solid, or at any rate
continuous bodies. The younger Cassini, indeed, ventured to express
doubts on the subject, but with this solitary exception, no suspicion
had ever existed among astronomers that the rings are otherwise than
continuous, until the discovery of the dark ring.

When the singular fact was discovered that the body of the planet can be
seen through the slate-coloured ring, the solidity of _this_ ring, at
any rate, began naturally to be questioned. The idea was suggested that
this formation may be fluid. Mathematicians applied rigorous processes
of investigation to the question whether a fluid ring can possibly exist
in such a position. The inquiry led to a re-examination of the whole
subject of the ring-system and its stability. Mathematicians took up the
question where Laplace had left it more than half a century before. He
had decided that solid rings might, under certain conditions, revolve
around a planet without being broken. But his inquiry had not been
carried to a conclusion. Now, when the work was completed, it was found
that the requisite conditions are certainly not fulfilled by the
Saturnian ring-system. The rings should be situated eccentrically, and
heavier at one side than the opposite. In fact they should have a
perceptible "bias." They exhibit, on the contrary, the most perfect
symmetry of figure--this symmetry, indeed, constitutes the great charm
of Saturn's telescopic appearance; and although, occasionally, the ball
has not seemed to be quite in the middle of the ring-system, the
displacement has never approached that which theory requires.

The conclusion to which mathematicians arrived was accordingly the
following:--

The rings may be held to be formed of a multitude of tiny satellites,
travelling nearly in one plane, each pursuing its own course around
Saturn, according to the laws of satellite motion, though of course
disturbed by the attraction of its fellow-satellites.

We owe this theory principally to the labours of Professor J. Clerk
Maxwell, who gained the Adams Prize offered by the University of
Cambridge for the best mathematical essay upon the conditions under
which a ring-system such as Saturn's can exist. But Professor Pierce, of
America, had (somewhat earlier) supplied a complete refutation of the
idea that the rings are solid and continuous bodies.

When the rings are fully open, as in fig. 30, the Saturnian system
affords as charming an object for telescopic observation as the
astronomer can desire. The rings are then exhibited in their full
beauty. The divisions, the dark ring, and the strange shading of the
middle ring, can be well seen in a telescope of adequate power. The
telescopic view is still more interesting when (as in fig. 30) the
planet throws a well-marked shadow upon the rings.

But perhaps the most beautiful of all the features which Saturn presents
to the telescopist is the strange variety of colour to be observed upon
his surface, and upon that of the rings. Mr. Browning, the eminent
optician, thus describes the colours which the planet presents in his
12-inch reflector:--

"The colours I have used," he says, referring to a painting of the
planet, "were--for the rings, yellow-ochre (shaded with the same) and
sepia; for the globe, yellow ochre and brown madder, orange and purple,
shaded with sepia. The great division in the rings is coloured sepia"
(not black as commonly described). "The pole and the narrow belts
situated near it on the globe are pale cobalt blue." "These tints," he
adds, "are the nearest I could find to those seen on the planet; but
there is a muddiness about all terrestrial colours when compared with
the colours of the objects seen in the heavens. These colours could not
be represented in all their brilliancy and purity, unless we could dip
our pencil in a rainbow, and transfer the prismatic tints to our paper."

I can corroborate these remarks from observations made upon the planet
with an 8½-inch reflector. It is, indeed, a circumstance worthy of note,
that the colours of the planets are much more strikingly exhibited by
reflecting telescopes than by refractors, insomuch that, while Sir W.
Herschel and Messrs. De la Rue and Lassell, making use of the former
class of instruments, have all recorded the marked impression which the
colours of Saturn and Jupiter have made upon them, we find that few
corresponding observations have been made by observers who have been
armed with even the most perfect specimens of the refracting telescope.

It must be noticed, however, that the colours of Saturn and his
ring-system can only be seen in the most favourable observing weather.

FOOTNOTES:

[14] Who assigned to him, as his representative metal, lead--a metal
"heavy, dull, and slow," as Don Armado puts it, in "Love's Labour's
Lost."

[15] Attention has lately been called, by the astronomers of the
Washington Observatory, to the fact that the statement usually made in
our books of astronomy, that Sir W. Herschel's latest determination of
Saturn's rotation period was 10h. 29m., is incorrect. His only
determination of the period gave 10h. 16m. 44s. for the Saturnian day.




[Illustration]




XII.

_FANCIED FIGURES AMONG THE STARS._


I THINK that every thoughtful student of the stars must have wondered
how the figures of the various objects now pictured in our star-maps
came to be imagined in the heavens themselves. It is a convenient answer
to inquiries of the sort to say that it became necessary at an early
stage in the progress of astronomy to have some means of identifying and
naming star-groups, and that the arrangement into constellations was as
suitable as any other that could have been desired. But it seems to me
altogether unlikely that, in the infancy of a science, a mere arbitrary
arrangement, such as this explanation supposes, should have been
adopted. If we try to imagine the position of the first observers of the
stars, what they wanted, and what they were likely to do,--and this _a
priori_ method of dealing with such questions is, I believe, the only
safe one,--we perceive that the division of the stars into sets named
after animals and other objects, without any real resemblance to suggest
such nomenclature, is as unlikely a course as could possibly be
conceived. Beyond all question, I think, the first watchers of the skies
(they can scarcely be called astronomers) would have taken advantage of
imagined similarity, more or less close, between each remarkable group
of stars and some known object, to identify the group, and to obtain a
name by which to speak of it.

Yet it must be admitted that, as the constellations are at present
arranged and figured, it is very difficult, in the great majority of
cases, to imagine the least resemblance between a constellation and the
object from which it derives its name. This is not only true of the
modern constellations, the preposterous _pneumatic machines_, _printing
presses_, _microscopes_, and so forth, with which Hevelius and his
successors foolishly crowded the heavens. Even the oldest of the old
constellations of Ptolemy, nay, some even of those which are found among
all nations, present, according to their present configuration, scarce
any resemblance to their antitypes. For instance, it is well known that
the Great Bear was recognised by many nations besides the Greeks and
those, whoever they may have been, from whom the Greeks derived the
constellation. We learn that when America was discovered the Iroquois
Indians called this constellation Okouari, or the Bear. So the
inhabitants of Northern Asia, the Phoenicians, the Persians, and others,
called this constellation the Bear. The Egyptians, not knowing the bear,
called the constellation the Hippopotamus, an animal resembling the bear
in several respects, as in its heavy body, short inconspicuous tail,
small head, and short ears. Yet the constellation, as at present
figured, is certainly not in the remotest degree like a bear. Apart from
the enormous tail given in the pictures to the bear (almost tailless in
reality), it is impossible for the liveliest imagination to recognise a
bear as the constellation is at present formed. Flammarion says that,
"even if we take in the smaller stars that stand in the feet and head,
no ingenuity can make it in this or any other way resemble a bear,"
adding the absurd explanation given by Aristotle, "that the name is
derived from the fact that of all human animals the bear was thought to
be the only one that dared to venture into the frozen regions of the
north, and tempt their solitude and cold." As though the shepherds and
tillers of the soil, who first gave names to the stars, were likely to
consider such far-fetched reasons, even if they had known either the
habits of the polar bears or had considered the relation of the northern
star-groups to the polar regions of the earth.

Now the question whether any real resemblance attracted the attention
of the earlier observers in such cases as this is by no means without
interest. If such a resemblance formerly existed, and does not now
exist, it would follow that quite a considerable proportion of the stars
have changed in brightness. Considering that each star is a sun, the
centre, most probably, of a system like that which circles around our
own sun, such a conclusion would be very startling indeed. It would have
a special interest for ourselves, somewhat in the same way that the news
that many railway accidents occur has an interest for those who travel
much by rail. If accidents frequently happen to those other suns, in
such sort that they either lose or gain greatly in brightness, an
accident of one or other kind might well happen to our own sun, in which
case the inhabitants of this earth would perish. For many of the stars,
by our supposition, would have changed so much as either to lose their
character as the defining stars of a constellation or by accession of
brightness to acquire that character which in old times they had not
possessed. Now, assuredly, a change of brightness competent to affect
_our_ sun's character (as viewed from any remote star system) in equal
degree, would be destructive to the inhabitants of the earth. None at
least of the higher races of animals or plants could bear the intense
cold resulting from a change of the former kind, or the intense heat
resulting from a change of the latter kind. Yet, if the constellations
were once named because of their imagined resemblance to various
objects, and if no such resemblance can now be even imagined, a change
of one or other kind in the condition of our sun must be regarded as
probable,--much in the same way that a regular traveller by train on any
line must be regarded as exposed to danger, if accidents are known to be
continually happening on that line.

What I now propose to do is to inquire whether we may not find the true
figures and proportions of the ancient constellations in another
way--viz., not by looking for them among the constellations as at
present bounded and figured in our star-maps, but by searching the
heavens themselves for them. This general method of search occurred to
me very long ago while I was preparing various star-atlases, but the
special mode of illustration here adopted occurred to me lately, while
preparing for young astronomers in the United States a series of monthly
maps showing the skies towards the north, south, east, and west, at
different times of the night all the year round, and in various
latitudes within the limits of the States. When I was in America I
noticed, as I travelled about over a tolerably wide range of latitude,
that the varying attitudes assumed by several of the constellations
suggested features of resemblance to different objects. In constructing
maps, simple in appearance, but based in reality on careful
calculations, this characteristic came out more clearly. Adopting a
particular way of presenting the connection between the various stars of
a constellation, I often found the figure suggested which had actually
been associated with the group of stars thus connected. Lastly, the idea
of extending this method to other cases naturally occurred to me, and
some of the results are presented in the present essay.

The method of delineation referred to is simply that of connecting the
stars of a group by lines, _ad libitum_, that is, not merely introducing
so many lines as will connect all the stars into a single set, but where
necessary to complete the delineation of the imagined figure, adding
other lines connecting pairs of stars belonging to the group, yet not so
many that _every_ pair of stars is connected by a line. The lines,
again, need not be straight. On the contrary, where a group of stars
forms a stream, the natural way of joining them is by lines so curved as
to follow the serpentine course thus suggested. And in other cases a
slight curvature of the lines joining pairs of stars will seem
permissible, because corresponding to a configuration suggested by the
stars themselves.

It is easily seen that in some of the simplest cases, the figure
associated with a constellation is at once suggested by this method of
delineation. For instance, take the case of the Northern Crown.

[Illustration: Fig. 32.--The Northern Crown.]

[Illustration: Fig. 33.--The Dolphin.]

In this constellation we have a group which, while consisting of only a
few stars, yet suggests very naturally the idea of a coronet of gems, as
shown in fig. 32. The same is true also, though perhaps in less degree,
of the Dolphin, as shown in fig. 33. It is noteworthy, by the way, that
this constellation can hardly have been invented by landsmen. For though
in our own time when the pictures of sea-creatures are accurately drawn,
so that persons who have never been to sea may have a correct idea of
the figure of such creatures, in old times it was exceedingly unlikely
that any but sailors would have such familiar knowledge of the dolphin
as to be reminded of that creature by a group of stars.

[Illustration: Fig. 34.--The Scorpion.]

A much more complex constellation than either of those just
mentioned--the Scorpion,--is even better represented by lineation, as
shown in fig. 34. It is not, however, with cases so remarkable as these
that the difficulty suggested at the outset is really connected. The
instances of really remarkable resemblance are so few that they must be
regarded as altogether exceptional. The best proof that the Scorpion is
unmistakably pictured by the stars is to be found in the fact that the
modern map-makers have not in this case departed much from the older
delineations. No one, in fact, who knows what a Scorpion is like, could
have any doubt as to the configuration of the body, at least, of the
celestial Scorpion. So that though such a case illustrates well the way
in which the method of delineation I have suggested may be made to
picture the object seen by the ancient observers in the heavens, it does
not afford any answer to the difficulty indicated by those who assert
that the Great Bear, the Lion, the Ship, and other of the old
constellation figures, have no real existence among the stars.

Before leaving the Scorpion, however, I must call attention to one or
two points which this remarkable constellation seems to establish.
First, it is clear that in its case real resemblance suggested the
association of a group of stars with a familiar object. Since this
resemblance remains, we infer that the group of stars presents now an
appearance closely resembling that which it presented four or five
thousand years ago. And as there is no special reason why the stars of
the Scorpion more than those of other constellations should retain their
lustre unchanged, we gain a certain probability for the belief that
_all_ the constellations are now very much as they were when first
named. Indeed, it so happens that the region occupied by the Scorpion is
perhaps that part of the heavens where changes would on the whole most
probably occur, the region of the Milky Way crossed by the Scorpion
being exceptionally irregular. We may note also that the part of the
earth where the observers lived who called this constellation the
Scorpion must have been one where the reptile is well known, a
conclusion which seems to dispose of the belief that the first
astronomers lived in high latitudes.

Let us, now, however, take some of the more difficult cases. We cannot
do better, perhaps, than take at the very outset the Great Bear, a
constellation of which many astronomers have asserted that it no longer
presents and probably never did present the slightest resemblance to a
bear.

I would lay down, in the first place, the hypothesis that the stars in
the region of the heavens now occupied by the Great Bear _must_ have
reminded the earliest observers of a large, heavily-bodied,
small-headed, short-eared, and short-tailed creature, such as either a
bear or a hippopotamus. Next, it may be taken for granted that the
creature of which they were thus reminded was one with which they were
familiar; and as we have already seen that the inventors of the oldest
constellations cannot have lived in very high latitudes, we may conclude
with great probability that the bear imagined in the heavens was not the
Polar bear, but the bear from which the first shepherd astronomers had
to defend their herds and flocks,--the Syrian bear, as it is commonly
called, though the species inhabited also the greater part of Asia Minor
in former times. The Indians may be supposed to have seen the grizzly
bear, not the smaller black bear, in the heavens. The features to be
looked for, then, among the stars, are those common to the bears of
comparatively low latitudes--not those of the polar bear.

So much premised we may proceed to inquire whether the region of the
heavens occupied by the Great Bear presents such a creature with
sufficient distinctness to suggest the idea of the animal to persons
familiar with its aspect.

It is perhaps hardly necessary to remark that we must not expect to find
a complete far less a perfect picture of a bear, or lion, or ship, in a
large region of the heavens such as is occupied by these constellations.
If some characteristic feature of a bear could be recognised in a group
of stars, the ancient observer would be content to recognise the region
of the heavens which would be occupied by the entire figure of the
animal, as belonging to a Great Bear, unless some marked peculiarity in
the stars of that region absolutely prevented the most lively
imagination from conceiving a bear's body there. As an instance of the
latter kind may be mentioned the Bull and the Ship, both of which
constellation figures are seen only in part. The Bull's head is
exceedingly well marked, as is the stern of the ship Argo, but the
liveliest imagination cannot recognise the body and tail of a bull, or
the fore-part of a ship, where these should be. Consequently the
ancients always regarded the Bull as a half bull, and (as Aratus is
careful to mention) they recognised only the stern of the good ship
Argo. But in general, where only some marked feature of an object could
be imagined, or perhaps two or three, they yet conceived the whole
object to be shown in the heavens, though it may have been altogether
impossible to distribute the other stars over the remaining portion of
the object in such a way as to show any natural association.

[Illustration: Fig. 35.--The Great Bear.]

The Great Bear seems to have been a constellation of this sort. One can
recognise the head of an animal like the bear or the hippopotamus, and
also the feet of such a creature, but the proper disposal of the stars
forming the animal's body is not so easy. This would not interfere,
however, with the choice of the bear to represent the region of stars
occupied by the constellation. Every one who has seen faces and figures
in the fire--and who has not?--knows that one or two features will
suffice to suggest a resemblance; either the imagination does all the
rest, or else the idea is suggested that some other object partially
conceals that portion of the imagined figure which is wanting.

Fig. 35 shows how, as I conceive, a bear was figured in the heavens by
those who, in various nations, gave to the stars of this part of the sky
the name of the Great Bear.

[Illustration: Fig. 36.--The Bear's Head.]

It will be noticed in the first place that the famous Septentriones (the
seven stars of the Plough, as in England the set is called, the Dipper
as it is called in America, the Corn-measurer as it was called by the
ancient Chinese) has little or nothing to do with the configuration of
the Bear, though forming a part of the constellation. It is the set of
small stars forming the head which seems to have suggested the idea of a
bear, though two of the paws are also well defined by the stars. But the
outlining of the head of a bear or hippopotamus is really sufficiently
close to require no very lively imagination to fill it in. Fig. 36,
giving these stars only, serves to show this, I think. That the entire
figure of a bear or hippopotamus was not recognised seems further shown
by the figure assigned to the constellation in the Zodiac of Tentyra, or
Denderah, where it appears as in fig. 37. The smaller figure is supposed
to represent the Little Bear.

[Illustration: Fig. 37.--The constellations of the Bears, represented as
a hippopotamus (?) and wolf (?) in the Denderah Zodiac.]

In the second place, the reader familiar with the constellations will
perceive that several stars not at present appertaining to the Great
Bear are included within the configuration itself of the animal in fig.
35. Thus the third magnitude star behind the right ear belongs to the
constellation of the Dragon; the third magnitude star near the hind
quarters is Cor Caroli, the chief star of the modern constellation
_Canes Venatici_, or the Hunting Dogs. It appears to me that we ought
not to expect that the first observers of the heavens, in recognising
imaginary features of resemblance between a group of stars and some
known object, would be careful to inquire whether some among those stars
were included in a group which they had compared or might afterwards
compare with another object. It is very necessary for the astronomer of
our time, nay, it may have even been very necessary for the astronomers
of the times of Hipparchus, Ptolemy, etc., to have the limits of the
constellations clearly defined, and to let no conspicuous star be common
to different constellations. But as regards the figures fancied in the
heavens by the first observers of the stars, considerations of that sort
would be of no importance whatever. Indeed, it is worthy of notice that
even so late as the time of Bayer, who gave to the stars their Greek
letters, the constellations were not separated from each other. He
called the star now known as Beta Tauri only, Gamma Auriga _also_, so
that now Auriga has stars Alpha, Beta, Delta, and so forth, but no
Gamma. Similarly, we look in vain for any star Delta in the
constellation Pegasus, simply because Bayer called one and the same star
Alpha Andromedæ and Delta Pegasi, the astronomers of our own time
retaining only the former name for this star,--the bright one adorning
the head of Andromeda. Even in our time it has been found impossible
properly to separate the older constellations from each other, so that
to this day the Scorpion remains entangled with the legs of Ophiuchus,
who is further inextricably mixed up with the Serpent. In fact, the
Serpent is divided into two separate parts by the body of Ophiuchus,
map-makers having no choice but either to allow Ophiuchus to divide
the Serpent, or the Serpent to divide Ophiuchus.

[Illustration: Fig. 38.--The Original Constellation of the Lion.]

In the next case, that of the Great Lion, we have still further to
depart from the modern configuration of the constellation. No one can
imagine the remotest resemblance between any part of a lion and the
grouping of stars falling on the corresponding portion of Leo in the
modern constellation. The nose of the Lion now falls near λ (fig.
38); μ and ρ forming the outline of the mane, β the end of
the tail, ε the nearer fore-paw, τ the nearer hind-paw. The
original Lion, I cannot doubt, was imagined somewhat as pictured in fig.
38. The head and mane are unmistakably pictured among the stars, the
paws fairly, the relatively small quarters and the tufted tail
exceedingly well--always remembering that anything like very close
resemblance is not to be looked for between a widely extended group of
stars and the figure of an animal or other large object. If we remember
also that uncultured nations, like children, are much quicker in
imagining resemblances than those carefully trained to recognise the
artistic delineation of objects, we cannot be surprised to find that
nearly all those nations who were acquainted with the lion imagined a
large leonine figure in the part of the heavens now centrally occupied
by our modern and most puny Lion, but including portions of Cancer, the
whole of Leo Minor (one of Hevelius's absurd inventions), the Hair of
Berenice, and a star or two belonging to Virgo.

[Illustration: Fig. 39.--The Original Ship "Argo."]

We have to treat in a similar way the constellation Argo of our present
maps, to get the good ship Argo, as the ancients must have conceived the
constellation. Fig. 39 shows the Ship as I imagine she was originally
pictured. The stars which mark her curved poop belong in part at
present (as doubtless they have long belonged) to the Larger Dog, while
those which mark the steering-oar belong to the modern constellation
Columba Noachi, or Noah's Dove. It must be observed that the bright star
Canopus, shown in the water, was not visible in the time of the first
observers in the latitude where they probably dwelt. The mighty gyrating
motion of the earth has caused these stars to be brought five or six
degrees further from the southern pole of the heavens. But Canopus and a
few of the small stars near it are the only stars which have thus been
added to the constellation as seen from the regions inhabited by the
first observers. (Canopus was known to the Arabian and Egyptian
astronomers.)

This introduces another point which seems worth noticing. At present the
ship Argo is never seen from any part of the earth's surface as pictured
in fig. 39. When due south, the position whence in all northern
latitudes the constellation is most favourably seen, the ship is always
tilted up at the stern: one would say, in more nautical phrase, she is
down by the head, if the ship had any fore-part; but from time
immemorial she has been a half-ship only. Some 4,000 years ago, however,
Argo stood nearly on an even keel when due south. Again, it is to the
mighty gyrational motion of the earth that we have to look for the cause
of the great change in the apparent position of the ship. The sphere of
the fixed stars has remained all the time unchanged, or very nearly so,
but the direction in which the earth's axis of rotation points has
swayed round (much as the axis of a reeling top sways round) through
about one-sixth part of a complete gyration.

In the regions where astronomy first began as a science, Argo not only
stood on an even keel but almost on the horizon when due south; and the
features of resemblance to a ship, which I have endeavoured to portray
in fig. 39, must have seemed much more striking there (and then) than
now.

The fore-part of the ship, or rather that region of the heavens where
the fore-part should be, is occupied by great masses of the Milky Way in
one of its brightest and most remarkable portions. I have sometimes
fancied that in some of the old Zodiac temples of star-worshippers the
constellation Argo was depicted as a mighty ship, gemmed with stars, and
heavily laden in its fore-part with great masses of gilded cloud to
represent the Milky Way, and that from such representations of the
constellation came the tradition of the ship Argo and its cargo of
golden fleece. Many parts of the story of Jason and his companions seem
to relate to objects depicted in the old constellation-domes,--as those
relating to the Dragon, to Hercules, Castor and Pollux, the Centaur,
etc. There is also a curious reference, in the tradition, to the stern
of the ship, which is much like what we can imagine as resulting from an
attempt to explain the appearance of this part only, in the set of
constellation figures. We read that the entrance to the Euxine Sea was
fabled to be closed up by certain rocks called Symplegades (the
Clashers), which floated on the water, and when anything attempted to
pass through came together with such velocity that not even birds could
escape. Phineas advised them to let a bird fly through, and if the bird
passed safely, to venture the passage. It passed with only the loss of
its tail; and the Argo, favoured by Juno, and impelled by the utmost
efforts of its heroic crew, passed also, though so narrowly that the
meeting rocks carried away part of her stern-works, which remained fixed
there thenceforward.

For my own part, I think we may not only regard the story of the ship
Argo as in reality a version, though much modified, of the account of
Noah's deluge, but consider the series of constellations, Aquarius,
Cetus, Eridanus, Argo, Corvus, Centaurus, Ara, and Sagittarius, as
typifying the same narrative. It is somewhat curious that if we place
these constellations in their original position,--that is, as they were
before the changes which the earth's great gyration has introduced
during the last four thousand years or so,--we find the following
coincidences with the account of the deluge. First comes Aquarius
(whose beginning would correspond with the sun's position on or about
the seventeenth day of the second month of the old Pleiades year)
pouring water. His range on the ecliptic (or the space he occupies in
the annual range represented in the zodiac temple) is about forty days.
Then came the watery constellations Eridanus, the river, and Cetus, the
sea monster, having, with the ship Argo, a range of about 150 days of
the annual circuit. About forty days later in the circuit we find
Corvus, the raven, whose feet rest on Hydra, the great celestial
sea-serpent, as though no dry land could be found by the bird. A dove
also, if we accept the interpretation above given of the Argo narrative,
may have been represented in this part of the star temple. Next we have
the Centaur, originally we know represented as a man only, offering an
animal as sacrifice on the altar Ara. There is a cloud of stars rising
from the altar: we may recall Manilius's account of the constellation,--

    "Ara, ferens thuris, stellis imitantibus, ignem."[16]

In this cloud is the Bow of Sagittarius, the bow being originally alone
shown, as it is indeed the only figure which can be imagined among the
stars of this region. So that these constellation figures seem to typify
Noah offering sacrifice on the Altar, and the Bow of Promise set in the
cloud above the altar. It is curious, too, that while the time of Noah's
leaving the ark was a year and ten days from the beginning of the rains,
the constellation Sagittarius overlaps the conjoined watery signs
Capricornus and Aquarius (running south of them) by about so much as
would correspond to ten days of the annual circuit of the heavens.

The objections to the view of matters above indicated are, first, that
the constellations referred to seem to have been formed because of real
resemblance between the star-groups and the figures associated with
them; and, secondly, that the Zodiac temples were probably erected by
star-worshippers, and would scarcely have been employed to typify such a
narrative as that of the Deluge. The theory that the narrative itself
was an attempt to interpret pictures represented on a Zodiac temple
will, of course, be objectionable to many readers; though they may not
be unwilling to believe that the fable of the Argonautic expedition had
its origin in some such way.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will have been noticed that in the figures which I have given of the
Great Bear, Lion, and Ship, I have not altogether adhered to my idea of
simply connecting the stars of a group by lines. To say the truth,
although a rough notion of a bear, lion, or ship may thus be given, the
figure so presented is not altogether satisfactory to the mind. In any
case, as for instance even in the Scorpion (of all these figures the
best marked), the line-figure is very imperfect. But in some cases it
does suggest the idea of an animal or figure, or a part of either, much
in the same way that the idea of a human figure can be suggested by a
few lines forming a skeleton figure, such as our old friend Tommy
Traddles used to draw. Now the Lion, Bear, and Ship are not well suited
for this sort of delineation, as anyone will find who tries to suggest
the idea of a bear, lion, or ship (of the old-fashioned heavily-sterned
sort) by means of a few lines.

In order, however, to show that in some cases a skeleton figure can be
formed by joining the stars of a constellation, and that the figure thus
formed represents (of course in an utterly inartistic sort of way) the
object associated with those stars, I will now take one or two instances
in which such resemblance suggested itself to me without being specially
sought for. I might add to the Crown, Dolphin, and Scorpion, the Chair
of Cassiopeia, the figure of Orion, and the constellation of the Cup; I
omit these, however, not because they are unfit for my purpose, but
because they so obviously illustrate my argument. No one, with the least
power of imagination, can fail to see how a chair, a belted giant, and a
cup, are pictured, as it were, in these constellations. I will take
others where the resemblance is less obvious.

Thus, I think scarcely anyone who is acquainted with the constellation
Andromeda can have failed to be perplexed by the association of the
figure of a chained lady with this group of stars. In the arrangement of
the stars themselves, without lines drawn to connect them, no such
figure can be imagined; at least I fail utterly for my own part when I
attempt to picture such a figure, even now that I recognise how the
figure is formed, skeleton-wise, by connecting lines. I cannot but think
this figure _must_ have been imagined from pictures of the groups of
stars with lines connecting them, and not from the stars themselves.
There is this reason, among others, for so thinking. The lady's head is
represented by a single star, Alpherat. Now a single star in the sky,
however bright, is not large enough to represent the head of a human
figure like Andromeda's. But the representation of a bright star like
Alpherat in a chart or sculpture has sufficient size to serve for a
head, because size is the only way in which brightness can be
indicated.

In fig. 40 the stars forming the constellation Andromeda are shown; also
the chair of Cassiopeia; and, on the right, one of the fishes and the
triangle. A group of stars in the upper left-hand corner marks the place
of the rock to which the chains are fastened which bind Andromeda's
right hand.

[Illustration: Fig. 40.--Andromeda.]

It cannot be said that the skeleton picture shewn in fig. 40 is very
graceful or artistic; but, on the other hand, it cannot, I think, be
doubted that there is enough in it to suggest the idea of a chained
person. The fish naturally suggests the idea that the place is by the
sea-shore. And the chair suggests the idea of some one on the shore
waiting and watching. In our own time, probably, the idea suggested
would be that of a person taking a bath, while some one sat in a chair
on the sands and waited for their turn. But to the old observers of the
heavens, unfamiliar as they were with sea-side diversions, the notion
would more naturally occur of a woman chained to a rock,

    Lifting her long white arms, widespread, to the walls of the basalt;

while not far off was imagined among the stars the monster Cetus coming
onward,

                    bulky and black as a galley,
    Lazily coasting along, as the fish fled leaping before it.

One of these fish is seen close by the figure of the chained Andromeda.
Near at hand they imagined the father and mother of the lady; Cassiopeia
sitting close to the shore; but

                            Cepheus far in the palace
    Sat in the midst of his hall, on his throne, like a shepherd of people,
    Choking his woe dry-eyed, while the slaves wailed loudly around him.

The story of Andromeda, as the reader doubtless knows, is not of Greek
origin. Its real origin is lost in a far antiquity. The Indians have
the same story in their astronomical mythology, and almost the same
names. Thus Wilford, in his Asiatic Researches, relating his
conversation with an Indian astronomer, says, "I asked him to show me in
the heavens the constellation of Antarmada, and he immediately pointed
to Andromeda, though I had not given him any information about it
beforehand. He afterwards brought me a very rare and curious work in
Sanscrit, which contained a chapter devoted to _Upanachatras_, or
extra-zodiacal constellations, with drawings of _Capuja_ (Cepheus), and
of _Casyapi_ (Cassiopeia), seated and holding a lotus flower in her
hand; of _Antarmada_, chained, with the fish beside her; and last, of
_Parasiea_ (Perseus), who, according to the explanation of the book,
held the head of a monster which he had slain in combat; blood was
dropping from it, and for hair it had snakes."

As another illustration of the method I have described, I give the
constellation Pegasus, or, as it was sometimes called, the Half-horse. I
do not assert that fig. 41 presents a very well shaped steed, any more
than that in fig. 40 a lady of exquisite proportions is pictured. But
one can perceive how the stars suggest the idea of a horse in one case,
and of a human figure with upraised fastened arms in the other. It is
commonly stated that Pegasus is one of the constellations showing no
resemblance at all to the figure associated with it. I think fig. 41
suffices to show that there is some slight resemblance at least.

[Illustration: Fig. 41.--Pegasus.]

It may be mentioned, in passing, that all the nations of antiquity would
not be likely to form equally clear conceptions of figures in the
heavens. There are marked differences between the various races of the
human family in this respect, just as there are marked differences
between various persons in the power of imagining figures under
different conditions. Some persons see figures at once in a cloud, in
the outline of a tree, in a fire, in a group of accidental markings,
and so forth; while others not only do not see such figures, but cannot
imagine them even when their outlines are indicated. So it is with
different races of men. There have been some which, even when only just
emerging from the utterly savage state, possessed so much of the
imaginative power as to be able to picture for themselves, by lines cut
with rude flint instruments on pieces of bone, horn, or ivory, the
animals with which they were familiar. We have even among such pictures
some belonging to an age so remote that the mammoth (or hairy elephant)
had not yet entirely disappeared from Europe; for, in the cave of La
Madeleine, at Dordogne, among other relics of the stone age, there has
actually been found a drawing of the mammoth scratched on a piece of
mammoth tusk. On the other hand, there are some races in existence at
the present day, in a more advanced stage of civilization, who cannot
perceive even in well-executed coloured drawings any resemblance to the
objects pictured. An aboriginal New Hollander, says Oldfield, "being
shown a coloured engraving" of a member of his own tribe, "declared it
to be a ship, another a kangaroo, and so on; not one of a dozen
identifying the portrait as having any connection with himself." A rude
drawing, with all the lesser parts much exaggerated, they can realise.
Thus, to give them an idea of a man, the head must be drawn
disproportionately large. Dr. Collingwood tells us that when he showed a
copy of the _Illustrated London News_ to the Kibalaus of Formosa, he
found it impossible to interest them by pointing out the most striking
illustrations, "which they did not appear to comprehend." Denham (I
quote throughout from Lubbock's most valuable and interesting work on
the Origin of Civilization) says that Bookhaloum, a man otherwise of
considerable intelligence, though he readily recognised figures, could
not understand a landscape. "I could not," he says, "make him understand
the print of the sand-wind in the desert, which is really so well
described by Captain Lyons' drawing. He would look at it upside down;
and when I twice reversed it for him he exclaimed, 'Why! why! it's all
the same.' A camel or a human figure was all I could make him
understand, and at these he was all agitation and delight. 'Gieb!
Gieb!--wonderful! wonderful!' The eyes first took his attention, then
the other features; at the sight of the sword, he exclaimed, 'Allah!
Allah!' and, on discovering the guns, instantly exclaimed, 'Where is the
powder?'"

We have in the consideration of this diversity of character between
different races and nations, as respects the power as well of imagining
as of delineating figures (the two are closely connected), one means of
judging to what race we owe the original constellations. For although
some figures in the heavens are manifest enough, others require a
considerable power of imagination. And it should be noted that this must
have been true even if we suppose (which I think I have succeeded in
showing we need not do) that many of the stars have changed in
brightness, and that thus resemblances have disappeared which formerly
existed. For, in any case, the heavens four, ten, or twenty thousand
years ago, or at whatever remote period we set the original invention of
the constellations, must have presented the same characteristics as at
present. It can never have been the case that all the star-groups could
be compared at once, obviously, with the figures of men and animals. So
that only a race of lively imagination could have found figures for all
the star-groups, as was certainly done in very remote times by some
race.

The race, then, to whom we owe the general system of constellations, was
probably one with so much talent for artistic delineation that in later
ages this people would have become distinguished for skill in painting
and sculpture. I think the sculptures found in Babylon, and the
traditions left of the artistic skill of the Babylonians, correspond
well with the belief that the constellations had their origin, and
astronomy its first development, among that people or a kindred race.

But the chief lesson to be derived (and I think it may fairly be
derived) from the study of the constellation-groups is, that enough
resemblance still remains, if only the arbitrary boundaries invented for
the constellation figures in recent times are overlooked, to assure us
that no very great changes have taken place in the aspect of the heavens
for thousands of years. A few stars here and there have certainly
changed greatly in brightness, and some few have changed considerably
even in position; while a considerable number have probably changed
slightly in brightness, and all, or very nearly all, have changed
somewhat in position. But on the whole the aspect of the stellar heavens
now is the same as it was when the constellation figures were first
imagined.

This thought not only assures us of the permanence of our own sun
(seeing that among the thousands of his fellow-suns which spangle the
heavens so few have changed in lustre), but seems to me to give to the
study of the stars a singular charm. Our antiquaries and archæologists
present for our study the relics of long past ages, and we may often
rest assured that the objects thus gathered for us were really used in
old times, though probably in a manner not understood by us, and when in
a condition very unlike that in which they have reached our times. In
nearly all such instances, however, doubt exists as to the antiquity of
the relic, as to the race to whom it really belonged, and as to its
real use and purport. But as regards the stellar heavens we have no
doubt. Of all the objects on which the eyes of remote races have rested,
the celestial bodies are undoubtedly the most ancient, while at the same
time they and they alone were most certainly contemplated by all
mankind. From the very earliest ages, from the time when the child-man
first turned his thoughts from mere animal wants to the wonders of
nature, the stars, and the sun and moon and planets must have drawn to
themselves the attention of all who had eyes to see even though they had
no power to understand the glories of the star-depths. Men pictured
among the stars the objects most familiar to them, the herds and flocks
which they tended, the herdsman himself, the waggoner, the huntsman, the
birds of the air, the beasts of the field, the fishes of the sea, the
ship, the altar, the bow, the arrow, and, one may say, all that
according to their knowledge existed in the heavens above, in the earth
beneath, and in the waters under the earth. Imperfect and anomalous as
these meanings are, in relation to modern astronomy, with its exact
methods, elaborate instruments, and profound investigations into the
meaning of all the phenomena of the heavens, they nevertheless retain
their place, and are likely long to do so, in virtue of the hold which
they took, in remote ages, on the imagination of mankind in general.

FOOTNOTES:

[16] "The altar, bearing fire of incense, pictured by stars." A
remarkably bright and complex portion of the Milky Way lies near the
constellation Ara, giving the appearance of smoke ascending from the
altar, only the altar must be set upright, as in my Gnomonic Atlas, not
inverted as in all the modern maps. (It is shown properly in the old
Farnese globe).




[Illustration]




XIII.

_TRANSITS OF VENUS._


As a transit of Venus, visible in this country, occurs in December,
1882, my readers, although they may not care for an account of the
mathematical relations involved in the observation and calculation of a
transit, will probably be interested by a simple explanation of the
reasons why transits of Venus are so important in astronomy.

Of course it is known that a transit of Venus is the apparent passage of
the planet across the face of the sun, when, in passing between the
earth and sun, as she does about eight times in thirteen years, she
chances to come so close to the imaginary line joining the centres of
those bodies that, as seen from the earth, she appears to be upon the
face of the sun. We may compare her to a dove circling round a dovecot,
and coming once in each circuit between an observer and her house. If
in her circuit she flew now higher, now lower, or, in other words, if
the plane of her path were somewhat aslant, she would appear to pass
sometimes above the cot, and sometimes below it, but from time to time
she would seem to fly right across it. So Venus, in circuiting round the
sun, appears sometimes, when she comes between us and the sun, to pass
above his face, and sometimes to pass below it; but occasionally passes
right across it. In such a case she is said to transit the sun's disc,
and the phenomenon is called a transit of Venus. She has a companion in
these circuiting motions, the planet Mercury, though this planet travels
much nearer to the sun. It is as though, while a dove were flying around
a dovecot at a distance of several yards, a sparrow were circling round
the cot at a little more than half the distance, flying a good deal more
quickly. It will be understood that Mercury also crosses the face of the
sun from time to time--in fact, a great deal oftener than Venus; but,
for a reason presently to be explained, the transits of Mercury are of
no great importance in astronomy. One occurred in 1861, another in 1868;
another in May, 1878; yet very little attention was paid to those
events; and before the next transit of Venus, in 1882, there will be a
transit of Mercury, in November, 1881; yet no arrangements have been
made for observing Mercury in transit on these occasions; whereas
astronomers began to lay their plans for observing the transit of Venus
in 1882, as far back as 1857.

The illustration which I have already used will serve excellently to
show the general principles on which the value of a transit of Venus
depends; and as, for some inscrutable reasons, any statement in which
Venus, the sun, and the earth are introduced, seems by many to be
regarded as, of its very nature, too perplexing for anyone but the
astronomer even to attempt to understand, my talk in the next few
paragraphs shall be about a dove, a dovecot, and a window, whereby,
perhaps, some may be tempted to master the essential points of the
astronomical question who would be driven out of hearing if I spoke
about planets and orbits, ascending nodes and descending nodes, ingress
and egress, and contacts internal and external.

Suppose D, fig. 42, to be a dove flying between the window A B and the
dovecot C _c_, and let us suppose that a person looking at the dove just
over the bar A sees her apparently cross the cot at the level _a_, at
the foot of one row of openings, while another person looking at the
dove just over the bar B sees her cross the cot apparently at the level
_b_, at the foot of the row of openings next above the row _a_. Now
suppose that the observer does not know the distance or size of the cot,
but that he does know in some way that the dove flies _just_ midway
between the window and the cot; then it is perfectly clear that the
distance _a b_ between the two rows of openings is exactly the same as
the distance A B between the two window-bars; so that our observers need
only measure A B with a foot-rule to know the scale on which the dovecot
is made. If A B is one foot, for instance, then _a b_ is also one foot;
and if the dovecot has three equal divisions, as shown at the side, then
C _c_ is exactly one yard in height.

[Illustration: Fig. 42.]

Thus we have here a case where two observers, without leaving their
window, can tell the size of a distant object.

And it is quite clear that wherever the dove may pass between the window
and the house, the observers will be equally able to determine the size
of the cot, if only they know the relative distances of the dove and
dovecot.

[Illustration: Fig. 43.]

[Illustration: Fig. 44.]

[Illustration: Fig. 45.]

Thus, if D _a_ is twice as great as D A, as in fig. 43, then _a b_ is
twice as great as A B, the length which the observers know; and if D _a_
is only equal to half D A, as in fig. 44, then _a b_ is only equal to
half the known length A B. In every possible case the length of _a b_ is
known. Take one other case in which the proportion is not quite so
simple:--Suppose that D _a_ is greater than D A in the proportion of 18
to 7, as in fig. 45; then _b a_ is greater than A B in the same
proportion; so that, for instance, if A B is a length of 7 inches, _b a_
is a length of 18 inches.

We see from these simple cases how the actual size of a distant object
can be learned by two observers who do not leave their room, so long
only as they know the relative distances of that object and of another
which comes: between it and them. We need not specially concern
ourselves by inquiring _how_ they could determine this last point: it is
enough that it might become known to them in many ways. To mention only
one. Suppose the sun was shining so as to throw the shadow of the dove
on a uniformly paved court between the house and the dovecot, then it is
easy to conceive how the position of the shadow on the uniform paving
would enable the observers to determine (by counting rows) the relative
distances of dove and dovecot.

Now, Venus comes between the earth and sun precisely as the dove in fig.
45 comes between the window A B and the dovecot _b a_. The relative
distances are known exactly, and have been known for hundreds of years.
They were first learned by direct observation; Venus going round and
round the sun, within the path of the earth, is seen now on one side
(the eastern side) of the sun as an evening star, and now on the other
side (the western side) as a morning star, and when she seems farthest
away from the sun in direction E V (fig. 46) in one case, or E _v_ in
the other case, we know that the line E V or E _v_, as the case may be,
must just touch her path; and perceiving how far her place in the
heavens is from the sun's place at those times, we know, in fact, the
size of either angle S E V or S E _v_, and, therefore, the shape of
either triangle S E V or S E _v_. But this amounts to saying that we
know what proportion S E bears to S V--that is, what proportion the
distance of the earth bears to the distance of Venus.[17]

[Illustration: Fig. 46.]

This proportion has been found to be very nearly that of 100 to 72; so
that when Venus is on a line between the earth and sun, her distances
from these two bodies are as 28 to 72, or as 7 to 18.

[Illustration: Fig. 47.]

These distances are proportioned precisely then as D A to D _a_ in fig.
45; and the very same reasoning which was true in the case of dove and
dovecot is true when for the dove and dovecot we substitute Venus and
the sun respectively, while for the two observers looking out from a
window we substitute two observers stationed at two different parts of
the earth. It makes no difference in the essential principles of the
problem that in one case we have to deal with inches, and in the other
with thousands of miles; just as in speaking of fig. 45 we reasoned that
if A B, the distance between the eye-level of the two observers, is 7
inches, then _b a_ is 18 inches, so we say that if two stations, A and
B, fig. 47, on the earth E, are 7000 miles apart (measuring the distance
in a straight line), and an observer at A sees Venus' centre on the
sun's disc at _a_, while an observer at B sees her centre on the sun's
disc at _b_, then _b a_ (measured in a straight line, and regarded as
part of the upright diameter of the sun) is equal to 18,000 miles. So
that if two observers, so placed, could observe Venus at the same
instant, and note exactly where her centre seemed to fall, then since
they would thus have learned what proportion _b a_ is of the whole
diameter S S' of the sun, they would know how many miles there are in
that diameter. Suppose, for instance, they found, on comparing notes,
that _b a_ is about the 47th part of the whole diameter, they would know
that the diameter of the sun is about 47 times 18,000 miles, or about
846,000 miles.

Now, finding the real size of an object like the sun, whose apparent
size we can so easily measure, is the same thing as finding his
distance. Any one can tell how many times its own diameter the sun is
removed from us. Take a circular disc an inch in diameter,--a halfpenny,
for instance--and see how far away it must be placed to exactly hide the
sun. The distance will be found to be rather more than 107 inches, so
that the sun, like the halfpenny which hides his face, must be rather
more than 107 times his own diameter from us. But 107 times 846,000
miles amounts to 90,522,000 miles. This, therefore, if the imagined
observations were correctly made, would be the sun's distance.

I shall next show how Halley and Delisle contrived two simple plans to
avoid the manifest difficulty of carrying out in a direct manner the
simultaneous observations just described, from stations thousands of
miles apart.

We have seen that the determination of the sun's distance by observing
Venus on the sun's face would be a matter of perfect simplicity if we
could be quite sure that two observations were correctly made, and at
exactly the same moment, by astronomers stationed one far to the north,
the other far to the south.

[Illustration: Fig. 48.]

The former would see Venus as at A, fig. 48, the other would see her as
at B; and the distance between the two lines _a a´_ and _b b´_ along
which her centre is travelling, as watched by these two observers, is
known quite certainly to be 18,000 miles, if the observers' stations
are 7,000 miles apart in a north-and-south direction (measured in a
straight line). Thence the diameter S S´ of the sun is determined,
because it is observed that the known distance _a b_ is such and such a
part of it. And the real diameter in miles being known, the distance
must be 107 times as great, because the sun looks as large as any globe
would look which is removed to a distance exceeding its own diameter
(great or small) 107 times.

But unfortunately it is no easy matter to get the distance _a b_, fig.
48, determined in this simple manner. The distance 18,000 miles is
known; but the difficulty is to determine what proportion the distance
bears to the diameter of the sun S S´. All that we have heard about
Halley's method and Delisle's method relates only to the contrivances
devised by astronomers to get over this difficulty. It is manifest that
the difficulty is very great.

[Illustration: Fig. 49.]

For, first, the observers would be several thousand miles apart. How
then are they to ensure that their observations shall be made
simultaneously? Again, the distance _a b_ is really a very minute
quantity, and a very slight mistake in observation would cause a very
great mistake in the measurement of the sun's distance. Accordingly,
Halley devised a plan by which one observer in the north (or as at A,
fig. 47) would watch Venus as she traversed the sun's face along a
lower path, as _a a´_ fig. 49; while another in the south (or as at B,
fig. 47) would watch her as she traversed a higher path, as _b b´_ fig.
49. By timing her they could tell how long these paths were, and
therefore how placed on the sun's face, as in fig. 49; that is, how far
apart, which is the same thing as determining _b a_, fig. 48. This was
Halley's plan, and as it requires that the duration of the transit
should be timed, it is called the method of durations. Delisle proposed
another method--viz., that one observer should time the exact moment
when Venus, seen from one station, _began_ to traverse the path _a a´_,
while another should time the exact moment when she _began_ to traverse
the path _b b´_; this would show how much _b_ is in advance of _a_, and
thence the position of the two paths can be determined. _Or_ two
observers might note the _end_ of the transit, thus finding how much
_a´_ is in advance of _b´_ This is Delisle's method, and it has this
advantage over Halley's--that an observer is only required to see
_either_ the beginning or the end of the transit, not _both_.

I shall not here consider, except in a general way, the various
astronomical conditions which affect the application of these two
methods. Of course, all the time that a transit lasts, the earth is
turning on her axis; and as a transit may last as long as eight hours,
and generally lasts from four to six hours, it is clear that the face of
the earth turned towards the sun must change considerably between the
beginning and end of a transit. So that Halley's method, which requires
that the whole duration of a transit should be seen, is hampered with
the difficulty arising from the fact that a station exceedingly well
placed for observing the beginning of the transit might be very ill
placed for observing the end, and _vice versâ_.

Delisle's method is free from this objection, because an observer has
only to note the beginning _or_ the end, not both. But it is hampered by
another. Two observers who employ Halley's method have each of them only
to consider how long the passage of Venus over the sun's face _lasts_;
and they are so free from all occasion to know the exact time _at_ which
the transit begins and ends, that theoretically each observer might use
such an instrument as a stop-watch, setting it going (right or wrong as
to the time it showed) when the transit began, and stopping it when the
transit was over. But for Delisle's method this rough-and-ready method
would not serve. The two observers have to compare the two moments at
which they severally saw the transit begin,--and to do this, being many
thousand miles apart, they must know the exact time. Suppose they each
had a chronometer which had originally been set to Greenwich time, and
which, being excellently constructed and carefully watched, might be
trusted to show exact Greenwich time, even though several months had
elapsed since it was set. Then all the requirements of the method would
be quite as well satisfied as those of the other method would be if the
stop-watches just spoken of went at a perfectly true rate during the
hours that the transit lasted. But it is one thing to construct a
time-measure which will not lose or gain a few seconds in a few hours,
and quite another to construct one which will not lose or gain a few
seconds in a journey of many thousand miles, followed perhaps by two or
three months' stay at the selected station. An error of five seconds
would be perfectly fatal in applying Delisle's method, and no
chronometer could be trusted under the conditions described to show true
time within ten or twelve seconds. Hence astronomers had to provide for
other methods of getting true time (say Greenwich time) than the use of
chronometers; and on the accuracy of these astronomical methods of
getting true time depended the successful use of Delisle's method.

[Illustration: Fig. 50.]

[Illustration: Fig. 51.]

Then another difficulty had to be considered, which affected both
methods. It was agreed by both Halley and Delisle that the proper moment
to time the beginning or end of transit was the instant when Venus was
just within the sun's disc, as in fig. 50, either having just completed
her entry, or being just about to begin to pass off the sun's face. If
at this moment Venus presented a neatly defined round disc, exactly
touching the edge of the sun, also neatly defined, this plan would be
perfect. At the very instant when the contact ceased at the entry of
Venus, the sun's light would break through between the edges of the two
discs, and the observer would only have to note that instant; while,
when Venus was leaving the sun, he would only have to notice the instant
when the fine thread of light was suddenly divided by a dark point. But
unfortunately Venus does not behave in this way, at least not always.
With a very powerful and very excellent telescope, in perfectly calm,
clear weather, and with the sun high above the horizon, she probably
behaves much as Halley and Delisle expected. But under less favourable
conditions, she presents at the moment of entry or exit some such
appearance as is shown in figures 51, 52, and 53, while with a very low
sun she assumes all sorts of shapes, continually changing, being for one
moment, perhaps, as in one or other of figs. 51, 52, and 53, and in the
next distorted into some such pleasing shape as is pictured in fig. 54.

[Illustration: Fig. 52.]

[Illustration: Fig. 53.]

Accordingly, many astronomers are disposed to regard both Halley's
method and Delisle's as obsolete, and to place reliance on the simple
method of direct observation first described. They would, however, of
course bring to their aid all the ingenious devices of modern
astronomical observation in order to overcome the difficulties inherent
in that method. One of the contrivances naturally suggested to meet
such difficulties is to photograph the sun with Venus upon his face. The
American astronomers, in particular, consider that the photographic
results obtained during the transit of 1874 will outweigh those obtained
by all the other methods. The German and Russian astronomers, as well as
those of Lord Lindsay's expedition, while placing great reliance on
photography, employed also a method of measuring the position of Venus
on the sun's disc, by means of a kind of telescope specially constructed
for such work, the peculiarities of which need not be here considered.

[Illustration: Fig. 54.]

The observations made in 1769 were so imperfect that astronomers deduced
a distance fully 3,000,000 miles too great. Of late, other methods of
observation had set them much nearer the true distance, which has been
judged to lie certainly between 91,800,000 miles and 92,600,000 miles--a
tolerably wide range.

But it may perhaps occur to some that the distance of the sun may be
changing. The earth might be drawing steadily in towards the sun, and so
all our measurements might be deceptive. Nay, the painful thought might
present itself that when the observations of 1769 were made, the sun
really was farther away than at present by more than 3,000,000 of miles.
If this were so, the earth would, in the course of a century, have
reduced her distance by fully one-thirtieth part, so that, supposing the
approach to continue, she would in 3,000 years fall into the sun, while,
long before that period had elapsed, the increased heat to which she
would be exposed would render life impossible.

Fortunately, we know quite certainly that no such approach is taking
place. It is known that the distance of the earth from the sun cannot
change without a corresponding change in her period of revolution--that
is, in the length of the year. The law connecting these two (indicated
in the note, page 279) is such that, on the reduction of the distance by
any moderate portion the period would be reduced by a portion half as
great again. For instance: if the distance of the earth from the sun
were reduced by a thirtieth part (or about 3,000,000 miles) the length
of the year would be reduced by a thirtieth and half a thirtieth--that,
is, by a twentieth part, or by more than eighteen days. We know that no
such change has taken place during the last century, or since the
beginning of history. Nay, from the Chaldean estimate of the length of
the year, which only exceeded ours by about two minutes, it is easily
shown that the distance of the earth from the sun has not diminished 200
miles within the last 2,500 years. So that, assuming even that the earth
is approaching the sun at this rate, or eight miles in a century, it
would be 1,250,000 years before the distance would be diminished by
100,000 miles, which is the probable limit of error in the determination
of the sun's distance.

If, finally, it be asked, What, after all, is the use of determining the
sun's distance? the answer we shall give must depend on the answer given
to the question, What, after all, is the use of knowing any facts in
astronomy other than those useful in navigation, surveying, and so on?
And I think that this question would introduce another and a wider
one--viz., What is the use of that quality in man's nature which makes
him seek after knowledge for its own sake? I certainly do not propose to
consider this question, nor do I think that the reader will find any
difficulty in understanding _why_ I do not. But accepting the facts: (1)
that we _are_ so constituted as to seek after knowledge; and (2) that
knowledge about the celestial orbs is interesting to us, quite apart
from the use of such knowledge in navigation and surveying, it is easy
to show that the determination of the sun's distance is a matter full of
interest. For on our estimate of the sun's distance depend our ideas as
to the scale, not only of the solar system, but of the whole of the
visible universe. The size of the sun, his mass, and therefore his
might, the scale of those wonderful operations which we know to be
taking place upon, and within, and around the sun; all these relations,
as well as our estimate of the size and mass of every planet, and
therefore our estimate of the earth's relative importance in the solar
system, depend absolutely and directly on the estimate we form of the
sun's distance. Such being the case (this being in point of fact the
cardinal problem of dimensional astronomy) it cannot but be thought
that, great as were the trouble and expense of the expeditions sent out
to observe the transit of 1874, they were devoted to an altogether
worthy cause.

FOOTNOTES:

[17] There is, however, a much more perfect way of determining this
proportion, by applying the law which Kepler found to connect the
distances of the planets from the sun with the times in which they
complete the circuits of their orbits. The law is that, if we take any
two planets, and write down the numbers expressing their periods of
circuit (say in days), and the numbers expressing their distances from
the sun (say in miles) in the same order; then if we multiply each
number of the first pair into itself, and each number of the second pair
twice into itself, the four numbers thus obtained will be proportional;
that is to say, as the first is to the second, so will the third be to
the fourth. Now, as every one knows who has worked sums in the rule of
three, when any three are given out of four proportionals, the fourth
can always be found; but we know the periods of circuit both of the
earth and Venus (365·2564 days and 224·7008 days respectively) very
exactly indeed, because they have traversed their orbits so many times
since they began to be observed by astronomers. We can call the earth's
distance 100, and then applying the rule just stated, we get Venus'
distance relatively to the earth's. The reader who cares to work out
this little sum will find no difficulty whatever--if at least he is able
to extract the cube roots of any number. The proportion runs thus:--

  365·2564 × 365·2564 : 224·7008 × 224·7008
        :: 100 × 100 × 100 : (Venus' distance cubed.)

Work out this sum and we get for Venus' distance 72·333. The ratio of
Venus' distance to the earth's is almost exactly expressed by the
numbers 217 and 300.


  Hazell, Watson, and Viney, Printers, London and Aylesbury.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

Obvious printer's errors corrected.

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including non-standard punctuation, inconsistently hyphenated
words, and other inconsistencies.






End of Project Gutenberg's Flowers of the Sky, by Richard A. Proctor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWERS OF THE SKY ***

***** This file should be named 56133-0.txt or 56133-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/1/3/56133/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Christopher Wright and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

